DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG113

TITLE: Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal vs Kavita Pawa Page No. 1/10 on 15 March, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/22455348/



DOMAIN: Criminal Law

SUBDOMAIN: Criminal Justice

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, case, madan, kavita, pawa, page, march, financial, criminal law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI RAVINDER SINGH­II METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE DWARKA COURTS, NEW DELHI Case No. : 2849/12 Unique Case ID No. : R0699622008 Madan Lal S/o Sh. Om Parkash R/o H. No. 42, Harijan Basti, Palam Extension, Dwarka, Sector­7, New Delhi­110075. .......................................Complainant Versus Kavita Pawa D/o Sh. Baldev Raj Pawa R/o A­2/140, First Floor, Janakpuri, Pankha Road, NewDelhi­110058. .......................................Accused Date of Institution: 03.12.2008 Plea of the accused: Pleaded Not Guilty Date of Reserving Judgment: 21/12/2013 Sentence or final Order: Convicted Date of Judgment: 15/03/2014 JUDGMENT BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE CASE 1. By way of the present judgment, I shall decide the complaint case U/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (hereinafter Said as NI Act) filed by the complainant Madan Lal against the accused Kavita Pawa D/o Sh. Baldev Raj Pawa R/o A­2/140, First Floor, Janakpuri, Pankha Road, NewDelhi­110058. 2. The factual matrix necessary for disposal of the present case as per the allegations in the complaint are that, in the month of April, 2008, the accused has approached the complainant to lend her a friendly loan of Rs. 5,00,000/­ as she required the same for her family needs. It is Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 1/10 further alleged that the accused also promised to repay the said loan amount up to 30.06.2008. It is further alleged that believing the assurance of the accused the complainant granted a loan of Rs. 5,00,000/­ to the accused and further to discharge her liability towards the loan amount the accused issued the cheque bearing no. 464985 dated 30.06.2008 amounting to Rs. 5,00,000/­ drawn on Citi Bank, Delhi branch in favour of the complainant. It is alleged that thereafter the accused has approached the complainant and submitted that her financial position is not sound and accordingly complainant should present the cheque in the first week of October, 2008. Thereafter it is alleged that as per the instructions of the accused the complainant presented the cheque in question for encashment with its bank and the same was dishonoured vide cheque returning memo dated 08.10.2008 with remarks "Account Closed". Thereafter it is alleged that the complainant contacted and appraised the accused about the fate of the cheque in question but the accused flatly refused to make the payment. Thereafter the complainant has given a legal notice of demand dated 23.10.2008 to the accused which was sent through Registered post and U. P. C. on 31.10.2008 thereby calling upon the accused to make the payment of the cheque amount. It is alleged that the accused has failed to pay any sum in response to the legal notice of demand as a result of which the complainant has filed the present complaint for prosecution of the accused U/s 138 of the NI Act. 3. After the complaint was filed, the complainant Madan Lal led his pre­ summoning evidence by way of an affidavit and after hearing the counsel for the complainant and considering the entire material and documents on record, summons were issued against the accused by the court vide order dated 04.12.2008 for the offence U/s 138 of NI Act. On appearance of the accused a separate notice U/s 251 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (hereinafter said as the Code) dated 17.10.2011 was given to the accused to which she pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Thereafter, the matter was listed for complainant's Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 2/10 evidence. 4. The complainant Madan Lal got himself examined as CW1 and adopted his pre summoning evidence affidavit which is Ex. CW1/1 and he also relied on other documents Ex. CW1/A to Ex. CW1/F. Ex. CW1/A is the original cheque in question, cheque returning memo is Ex. CW1/B, the legal notice of demand dated 23.10.2008 is Ex. CW1/C, Registered post receipts vide which the aforesaid notice was sent as Ex. CW1/D and Ex. CW1/E. Returned AD Card is Ex. CW1/F. CW­1 also relied upon the acknowledgment in handwriting of the accused as Ex. CW1/G. CW­1 was duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused. Thereafter, the complainant's evidence was closed at request. STATEMENT OF ACCUSED U/S 313 OF THE CODE. 5. Thereafter, the statement of accused was recorded U/s 313 of the Code in which all the incriminating evidence along with exhibited documents were put to the accused Kavita Pawa in which she stated that she has not taken any loan from the complainant. It is further submitted by the accused that she has taken a loan of Rs. 5,00,000/­ from a person called Rajesh Kumar and she has repaid the entire loan amount to Rajesh Kumar. It is further submitted by the accused that a case was also filed by Rajesh Kumar in Rohini Courts and the same was also settled. It is also submitted by the accused that she has given five cheques to Rajesh Kumar at the time of taking of the loan and the present cheque in question is also a part of those cheques. It is further submitted by the accused that she has not given the cheque in question to the complainant and she has given the same to Rajesh Kumar as a security in a blank manner after putting her signatures thereon. The accused further admitted that she has received the legal demand notice from the complainant but she denied her liability towards the complainant. She also stated after settling the case instituted by Rajesh Kumar in Rohini Courts she has also requested Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 3/10 Rajesh Kumar to hand over her security cheques but the same were not returned to her by Rajesh Kumar. It is also submitted that the complainant has falsely implicated her in the present complaint case and she owes no liability towards the complainant. DEFENCE EVIDENCE. 6. Thereafter the case was fixed for defence evidence. Thereafter Ld. counsel for the accused filed an application U/s 315 of the Code for allowing the accused to be produced as a defence witness. The said application was allowed. Accused deposed as DW1. Accused also examined three other witnesses in her defence i.e. DW­2 Rajesh Kumar, DW­3 Arvind Batra and DW­4 Mukesh Kumar. All the defence witnesses were duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the complainant. Thereafter defence evidence was closed at request of Ld. Counsel for accused and the case was listed for final arguments. FINAL ARGUMENTS 7. Final arguments were addressed on behalf of both the parties. I have heard the arguments of Ld. Counsels for both the parties and have also given my anxious and thoughtful consideration to the same and further I have also perused the entire record of the case file. Before proceeding further It is imperative for me to go through the relevant provisions of law. Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act reads as: "Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc, of funds in the account:Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in while or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 4/10 nothing contained in this section shall apply unless (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation:For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability. 8. Now I am dealing with each of the ingredients of section 138 of the NI Act in light of the defence raised by the accused. 9. In the instant case, it is not disputed by the accused that the Cheque in Question Ex. CW1/A is drawn on the account maintained by her. Further the signature on the cheque in question Ex. CW1/A is also not disputed by the accused. The presentation and dishonor of the cheque in question is also not disputed by the accused. Further the accused has also not disputed the receipt of the legal demand notice Ex CW1/C. In fact the accused has herself admitted during her statement recorded under section 313 of the Code that she has received the legal demand notice Ex CW1/C. Therefore, In view of the evidence on record it stands proved that the cheque in question Ex CW1/A was signed by the accused and the same was drawn on account maintained by her. It also stands proved that the cheque in question was presented within the period of its vailidity and the same was dishonored vide cheque returning Memo Ex. CW1/B with remarks "Account Closed". And further it also stands proved that the legal demand notice Ex CW1/C has been served upon the accused. 10. Perusal of the entire evidence reveals that the only defence taken by the accused in the present complaint case is that she has not taken any loan from the complainant and that she has taken loan from one Rajesh Kumar with Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 5/10 whom she has already settled the matter and the blank signed Cheque in question Ex CW1/A was given by her to Rajesh Kumar as security and the same has been misused by the complainant. 11. It is trite to say that the crux of penal liability under Section 138 of the Act is that the Cheque in question must be issued for the discharge of any legal debt or liability. Existing of legal debt or liability is sine qua non for constituting the offence. Before proceeding further it is imperative for me to take notice of the provisions of Sections 118(a) and 139 of the NI Act which read as under: "118. Presumptions as to negotiable instruments.--Until the contrary is proved, the following presumptions shall be made­ (a) of consideration.--that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration, and that every such instrument when it has been accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for consideration;" "139. Presumption in favour of holder.--It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque, of the nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. 12. The Division bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Krishna Janardhan Bhat v. Dattatraya G. Hegde, (2008) 4 SCC 54, has held that the accused can discharge the burden of presumption U/s 118 and U/s 139 of the NI Act by raising a probabale defence on the strength of preponderance of probabilites. 13. In RANGAPPA Versus SRI MOHAN AIR 2010 SC 1898 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is a settled position that when an accused has to rebut the presumption under Section 139, the standard of proof for doing so is that of 'preponderance of probabilities'. The accused can rely on the materials submitted by the complainant in order to raise such a defence. 14. From the reading of the above said provisions and the judgments the position of law which emerges is that once execution of the promissory note Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 6/10 is admitted, the presumption under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act would arise that it is supported by a consideration. Such presumptions are rebuttable. The accused can prove the non­existence of a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the accused discharges the initial onus of proof by showing that the existence of consideration was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the Complainant who will be obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and upon its failure to prove would disentitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. The burden upon the accused of proving the non­ existence of the consideration can be either direct or by bringing on record the preponderance of probabilities by reference to the circumstances upon which he/she relies. In case, where the accused fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non­existence of the consideration, the complainant would invariably be held entitled to the benefit of presumption arising under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act in his favour. 15. Now coming to case in hand it is the case of the complainant that he has granted loan to the accused on the same date in the year 2008 when the accused had come to his house along with her brother in law (Jija). The complainant examined himself as CW­1 and during his cross examination it was revealed that for making payment to the accused the complainant has borrowed money from his friend Mukesh Kumar (DW­4) and the accused has also handed over the cheque in question Ex CW1/A to the complainant for payment to the complainant. 16. To rebut the shadow of presumption casted upon the accused by Section 118 and 139 of the NI Act, the accused has examined herself as DW­1 and reiterated that she has not taken any loan from the complainant Madan Lal and further stated that she has taken a loan from one Rajesh Kumar which has already been repaid by her during settlement in court proceedings which were pending at Rohini Courts. Interestingly, DW­1 during her cross examination was confronted with the documents Ex. DW­1/P, on which the signatures has been admitted by the accused however accused also stated Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 7/10 that the contents of the same has not been written by her and further stated that she has given blank signed papers to Rajesh Kumar who has misused the same. Looking at the content of the document Ex. DW1/P it is revealed that the same is an acknowledgment given by the accused stating that she owes an amount of Rs. 5,00,000/­ to the complainant and she would be repaying the same by 15th of April, 2009. Further during cross examination of DW­1 (accused) it is also revealed that a document Ex. CW1/G dated 23.10.2009 was also written by the accused which also reiterates the admission of the accused that she has taken loan from the complainant and she needs one month time for making the payment. During further cross examination of DW­1 (accused) it was revealed that the said document Ex. CW1/G is also in the hand writing of the accused as the same was admitted by the accused. Even believing the accused that the acknowledgment letter Ex. DW1/P is not written by her and the same bears only her signatures, even then there is no explanation from the accused as to why the letter Ex. CW1/G dated 23.10.2009 admittedly bearing her handwriting and signature acknowledging her liability towards the complainant has been written by the accused, as there is no occasion for her to write the letters CW1/G. The admissions of the accused through her letter CW1/G itself established that she has taken loan from the complainant. The aforesaid letter Ex CW1/G written by the accused also dents the evidence given by DW­3 (brother in law of the accused) who stated that he had never accompanied the accused to the complainant's house for taking any loan for the accused. Therefore testimony of DW­3 cannot be relied upon in light of surrounding contrary facts and evidence on record which supports the claim of the complainant that accused has taken loan from the complainant and further DW­3 is also an interested witness being the relative of the accused herein. 17. The accused has also produced Rajesh Kumar as DW­2 and he denied that he has taken any document from the accused. However, it is admitted by the witness that he has settled a case with the accused herein in Rohini Courts. It is the defence of the accused that she has taken loan from Rajesh Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 8/10 Kumar (DW­2) and she has given the signed cheque in question Ex. CW1/A to him. Evidence reveals that the matter pending between Rajesh Kumar and the accused was settled between the accused herein and Rajesh Kumar in the year 2011 whereas the present proceedings relates to the year 2008. Further on perusal of the certified copies of the judicial proceeding placed on by the accused herself i.e DW1/A (Colly) showing settlement between accused and the DW­2 it is surprising to see that the same does not find any mention of the present proceedings. It is highly inconceivable that a honest debtor returning all the money to its creditor would not make a reference of all the pending proceedings between him and the creditor. Further the acknowledgement CW1/G written by the accused shows that she has also taken loan from the complainant and the present proceedings is qua a different transaction which took place between him and the complainant. Altogether the testimony of DW­2 has not at all supported the stand of the accused. 18. Further the accused also produced one Mahesh Kumar as DW­4. However, the said Mahesh Kumar stated that he and the complainant used to have financial dealing/transactions with each other and the complainant Madan Lal has taken loan from him in the year, 2008 which supports the claim of the complainant only that he given loan to the accused after borrowing from his friend Mahesh Kumar DW­4. 19. The entire evidence favours and supports the stand of the complainant. Accordingly, I hold that the accused has taken loan from the complainant and has issued the cheque in question to the complainant in discharge of her liability. Further it is also trite to say that once the signature on the cheque in question is admitted by the accused, as has happened in this case, the defence of the accused that the particulars in the cheque in question has not been filled by the accused also do not holds any ground. 20. It is settled that mere denial and putting suggestions to the witnesses would not absolve the accused from any liability. It was for the accused to Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 9/10 prove by leading cogent evidence how and in what manner the cheque in question has come in possession of the complainant. The accused has miserably failed to lead any evidence in this regard and inturn the presumptions U/s 118 (a) and 139 of the NI Act raised against her by the statute stands unrebutted. Further from the evidence on record it also stands proved that the accused has failed to pay the cheque amount within 15 days from the receipt of legal demand notice. Accordingly, I hold that complainant has proved all the ingredients of the offence U/s 138 of NI Act against the accused. Accordingly, accused Kavita Pawa D/o Sh. Baldev Raj Pawa, is hereby convicted of the offence U/s 138 of NI Act. Copy of this judgment be given to the convict free of cost. This Judgment contains 10 pages and every Page of this judgment has been signed by me. Announced in the open Court (RAVINDER SINGH -II Dated 15.03.2014 MM (NI Act ­07) DWARKA/NEW DELHI. Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 10/10 Case No. : 2849/12 Madan Lal Versus Kavita Pawa Page No. 11/10
