DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG127

TITLE: Sukhjot Sodhi & Others vs Sebi on 10 October, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/34818882/



DOMAIN: Criminal Law

SUBDOMAIN: Criminal Justice

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, sukhjot, sodhi, sebi, october, financial, criminal law

CONTENT:

1 IN THE COURT OF MS. HEMANI MALHOTRA, ADDITIONAL:SESSIONS JUDGE-05 (CENTRAL), TIS HAZARI COURTS: DELHI CA No.24/14 Unique ID No.0240IR0059942014 Sukhjot Sodhi & Others Vs SEBI (1) Sukhjot Sodhi, S/o Asdev Singh Sodhi R/o 2282, Sector 21-C, Chandigarh (2) Kamaljeet Sodhi, W/o Sukhjot Sodhi, R/o 2282, Sector 21-C, Chandigarh .............Appellants Versus Securities and Exchange Board of India, Having registered office at 32, Rajendra Bhawan, Rajendra Place, New Delhi. ...............Respondent Date of institution :03.02.2014 Date of conclusion of arguments/ reservation of Judgment :23.09.2014 Date of pronouncement of judgment :10.10.2014 JUDGMENT 1. Present appeal has been preferred against the impugned judgment of conviction dated 02.01.014 and order of sentence dated 04.01.2014 passed by the court of learned ACMM (Special Acts) Central, Tis Hazari Courts in complaint case No.52/2005 whereby the appellants were convicted for an offence punishable u/s 24 (1) read with Section 27 of SEBI Act, 1992. Appellant No.1 was sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment of six months and appellant No.2 was sentenced to undergo simple Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI imprisonment of three months along with payment of fine of Rs.2.5 lacs each and in case of default of payment of fine, the defaulting convict was to undergo further simple imprisonment of two months. 2. The brief facts necessary for the disposal of the present appeal are that a complaint was filed by Mr. Ajay Srivastava, Assistant General Manager of SEBI against Agro Gold Plantations and Resorts Limited and its three directors bearing complaint case No.52/2005 under Sections 24 (1) and 27 of SEBI Act. It was alleged that the accused had not complied with the provisions and Regulations of SEBI Act, 1992 with respect to Collective Investments Schemes (hereinafter referred to as CIS). The Regulation in this regard was notified in the year 1999 titled as Collective Investments Schemes Regulations. The accused were operating 12 CIS in violation of the said regulations and had raised more than Rs.7 crores from general public. Despite the notification of Collective Investments Schemes Regulations, the accused neither applied for registration nor took any steps for winding up of the schemes and repayment to the investors as provided under the regulations and had thus, violated the provisions of Section12 (1B) of SEBI Act, 1992 and Reg.5(1) read with Reg. 68 (1), 68 (2), 73 and 74 of the said Regulations. 3. Notice u/s 251 Cr.P.C was served upon the appellants/accused persons for commission of offences punishable u/s 24 (1) and 27 of the SEBI Act to which, the accused persons pleaded not guilty and claimed trial while accused Asdeb Singh Sodhi was discharged. After holding trial, the learned trial court passed the judgment of conviction and order of sentence which has been impugned before this court. 4. I have heard the learned counsels for the parties at length and have perused the trial court record and the judgments relied upon with utmost care. 5. To decide the controversy regarding the liability of the appellants, it is imperative to examine the relevant provisions concerning the CIS as formulated by SEBI. Section Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI 12 (1B) of the SEBI Act 1992 came to be inserted w.e.f 25.01.1995 and provided that "No person shall sponsor or cause to be sponsored or carry on or caused to be carried on any venture capital funds or collective investment schemes including mutual funds, unless he obtains a certificate of registration from the Board in accordance with the regulations." The proviso to the aforesaid sub-section, permits any person sponsoring or causing to be sponsored, carrying or causing to be carried on any such fund or scheme operating in the security market immediately after 25.01.1995, for which no certificate of registration was required prior to the said date, to continue to operate till such time Regulations are made under Clause (d) of Sub-Section (2) of Section 30. Meaning thereby, that after 25.01.1995 no person could have 'started' any CIS without obtaining certificate from SEBI (respondent) and the ones who were operating CIS before 25.01.1995 could do so only till Regulations were framed. 6. The Regulation which came in force on 15.10.1999 provides that if the C.I. Scheme is not registered in terms of the notification then the scheme is to be wound up in terms of Regulation 73 and a report of winding up has to be submitted to SEBI. Regulation 73: "provides for a complete mechanism for the manner of repayment and winding up of the existing collective investment scheme. Regulation 73 states as under:- Manner of repayment and winding up 73. (1) An existing collective investment scheme which: (a) has failed to make an application for registration to the Board; or (b) has not been granted provisional registration by the Board; or (c ) having obtained provisional registration fails to comply with the provisions of regulation 71; shall wind up the existing scheme. (2)The existing Collective Investment Scheme to be wound up under sub-regulation (1) shall send an information memorandum to the investors who have subscribed to the schemes, within two months from the date of receipt of intimation from the Board, detailing the state of affairs of the scheme, the amount repayable to each Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI investor and the manner in which such amount is determined. (3) The information memorandum referred to in sub-regulation 92) shall be dated and signed by all the directors of the scheme. 94)The Board may specify such other disclosures to be made in the information memorandum , as it deems fit. (5) The information memorandum shall be sent to the investors within one week from the date of the information memorandum. (6) The information memorandum shall explicitly states that investors desirous of continuing within the scheme shall have to give a positive consent within one month from the date of the information memorandum to continue with the same. (7) The investors who given positive consent under sub-regulation (6) shall continue with the scheme at their risk and responsibility: Provided that if the positive consent to continue with the scheme, is received from only twenty-five per cent or less of the total number of existing investors, the scheme shall be wound up. 2. On completion of the winding up, the existing collective investment scheme shall file with the Board such reports, as may be specified by the Board. Existing schem not desirous of obtaining registration to repay Regulation 74: "An existing Collective Investment Scheme which is not desirous of obtaining provisional registration from the Board shall formulate a scheme of repayment and make such repayment to the existing investors in the manner specified in regulation 73." 7. To prove its case, the complainant examined Sh.Ajay Srivastav, Assistant General Manager, SEBI as PW1 and Sh.Nilender Kumar Choudhary, Audit Assistant as PW2. 8. PW1 in his examination in chief had deposed that the CIS regulated companies had come into the ambit of regulation and market organization etc. under the SEBI and that SEBI had framed regulations to regulate the business of CIS entities. SEBI had published a press release dated 26.11.1997 as per which, all the CIS entities were required to file information regarding their schemes. Subsequent to the press release Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI dated 26.11.1997, regulations were framed on 15.10.1999, as per which the CIS regulated companies in order to continue were required to either get themselves registered with SEBI or to wind up their schemes and repay the funds to the investors. The accused No. 1 (company) did not apply for registration and therefore, was asked to wind up its scheme and to repay the investors and to file the winding up and repayment report to SEBI . Pursuant to which, the accused company neither wound up the schemes nor filed the winding up and repayment report, thereby violating the regulations and the SEBI Act. PW1 proved the authority letter in his favour as CW1/A, the photocopy of press release dated 26.11.1997 as Ex.CW 1/B, photocopy of public notice dated 18.12.1997 as Ex. CW 1/C, the letter dated 09.01.1998 sent by the accused company to SEBI as Ex. CW 1/D, copy of press release dated 27.03.2000 as Ex. CW1/E,show cause notice dated 12.05.2000 sent by SEBI to accused company as Ex. CW 1/F, the photocopy of letter dated 31.07.2000 sent to accused company for winding up of the scheme and repayment report as Ex CW 1/H, the report that the premises bearing No.3354 , Sector D, Pocket III, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi was lying locked as Ex. CW1/J , the press release dated 14.01.2001 inviting the attention of the investors as well as CIS entities as Ex. CW 1/L. 9. In his cross examination, PW 1 had reiterated that there was no requirement for taking approval of the schemes floated by plantations companies prior to October 1999 but such companies were required to file information regarding the schemes already floated in the market and were also advised not to float new schemes till the regulations were notified. He also testified that these directions for the first time were issued on 26.11.1997. Thereafter, SEBI had received information from the accused company with regard to the Collective Investments Schemes floated by them vide their letter Ex.CW1/D. PW 1 had categorically denied that Ex. CW1/D was neither communicated on behalf of the accused company nor any approval was taken by Sh.Jagdish Patra Company Secretary of the accused Company from the Board of Directors of the accused company. He specifically testified that Ex. CW 1/D was on the letter head of the company. PW 1 had also testified that subsequent to the receipt Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI Ex. CW1/D, the SEBI had conducted audit of the accused company and the same being confidential matter of SEBI, the audit report was not sent to the accused company. PW 1 denied that the audit report was different from the contents of letter Ex. CW 1/D and therefore, the audit report was not placed on the court record. He also denied that the amount which was collected by the accused company did not fall within the definition of CIS as defined under the SEBI Act. During his further cross examination , PW 1 also denied that the complaints were not made by the investors qua their not receiving any payments with respect to the CIS floated by the accused company. He had also deposed that it was the duty of the accused company as notified by the regulations of October 1999 to provide information on the basis of the regulations regarding the amount repaid to the investors. PW 1 had also denied that as per the scheme of November 1999, registration by the accused company was not compulsory. He reiterated that no information was received from the accused company regarding the repayments to the investors. He also testified that the letters Ex. CW 1/F, CW 1/H and CW1/K were addressed to the accused company and denied that public notices Ex.CW 1/ B, Ex.CW 1/C, Ex.CW 1/E, Ex. CW1/L and Ex.CW 1/M were not issued. 10. It was vehemently contended by learned counsel for the appellants that the complainant miserably failed to prove that the accused had floated CIS schemes and the document Ex.CW 1/D which has been heavily relied upon by the complainant in this regard is neither written nor signed by the appellants and hence, no reliance can be placed upon the same. 11. The argument of the learned counsel for the appellants with respect to the admissibility of Ex.CW1/D is not only misplaced but manifestly incorrect. The bare perusal of Ex. CW1/D reveals that it is a communication dated 09.01.1998 by one Jagdish Patra , Company Secretary of Agrogold Plantations and Resorts Ltd addressed to the Regional Manager, SEBI. The said communication reveals that it is on the letter head of the accused company bearing the address of the registered office as well as the Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI corporate office. From Ex. CW 1/D, it also reflects that it was received on 14.01.1998. The said communication not only gives an introduction of the accused company but also gives a detailed brief of Collective Investments Schemes like Agrogold Teak Unit, Dhantushti, Agrogold Dhantushti Bonds, Dhantushti Bonds II and Child Education Bond floated by accused company . It also gives details of the promoters including the discharged accused Sh. Asdev Singh Sodhi and the appellants herein. It is pertinent to note that after the incriminating evidence against the appellants were put to the appellants as mandated u/s 313 Cr.P.C, the appellants refused to lead any evidence. In their statements u/s 313 Cr.P.C, although the appellants denied giving any information vide Ex. CW1/D, however, in the same statement they categorically admitted that they did not float any further collective investments schemes after the regulations of SEBI thereby admitting the factum of floating CIS. They further stated in their statements that they had already repaid the investments of most of the investors. It was also admitted by them in the statements that even though the complainant had issued public notices (Ex.CW 1/B and Ex. CW1/C), they had not filed any reply to the public notices. It is also significant to mention here that no attempt was made by the appellants to lead defence evidence to prove that Sh. Jagdish Patra was not the Company Secretary or that the letter dated 09.01.1998 (Ex. CW 1/D) did not bear the signatures of Jagdish Patra or was not communicated to SEBI. The scrutiny of the deposition of CW-1 clearly reveals that no suggestion was put to CW-1 that the signature appearing on Ex.CW1/D were not that of Sh. Jagdish Patra. It is also relevant to mention here that no objection was taken to the production and proof of Ex.CW 1/D during the examination of PW1. No suggestion was given to CW-1 that Sh. Jagdish Patra had no authority of the Board of Directors to send this communication. 12. It was further contended that the documents (Ex.CW1/B to Ex.CW1/L) relied upon by the complainant were not supplied to the appellants and the non supply of the documents is fatal to the trial. To support his said contention, he has relied upon a case titled as Vinod Kumar Jha Vs Central Bureau of Investigation reported as Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI JCC 2009(3) 2221. The argument of learned counsel for appellants appears to be an afterthought as the careful scrutiny of the deposition of CW-1 reveals that not even once objection regarding non supply of Ex. CW1/B to Ex. CW1/L was taken by the appellants during their exhibition. It is the case of the respondent/complainant that there was no objection to these documents during the examination of CW-1 as these documents stood supplied to the appellants. 13. It was also urged that the learned Trial Court failed to consider the Gazette Notification from which it was established that the ROC gave public notice inviting objections from the public against the Agro Gold Plantations and Resorts Limited . As the ROC did not receive any objections, the name of the company was struck off from the register of ROC so no criminal liability can be fastened on the company/Agrogold Plantations and Resorts Limited. In this context learned counsel for appellants relied upon the Gazette Notification for 10th June to 16 June 2006 whereby notice was given pursuant to Sub-Section (3) of Section 560 of the Companies Act, 1956 that at the expiration of three months from the date hereof, the name of M/s Agrogold Plantations & Resorts Limited, unless cause is shown to the contrary, will be struck off from the Register and the said company will be dissolved. 14. It is pertinent to mention here that no evidence was led by the appellants to the effect that M/s Agrogold Plantation and Resorts Limited was struck off the register and it was dissolved. Even otherwise, I am in agreement with the argument of learned counsel for the complainant that the winding up of a company under Companies Act, 1956 is totally different and distinct from the filing of mandatory Winding Up and Repayment Report with the SEBI. In my opinion, even if a company is wound up under the Companies Act, it is not discharged from its obligation to file Winding Up and Repayment Report under the SEBI Act, CIS Regulations which in this case was mandatory requirement. 15. It was then urged by the learned counsel for the appellants that the complainant SEBI Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI did not mention anywhere in their complaint that the appellants were in charge of the day to day affairs of the company and were responsible for the work and conduct of the business of the company. This itself is fatal and the complaint could not have been entertained without these clear and unambiguous allegations against the appellants. In this regard, learned counsel for the appellants has relied upon cases titled as Virender Kumar Aggarwal & Another Vs VIP Power Projects Pvt Limited reported as III (2012) BC 397 and N.K. Vahi Vs Shekhar Singh and Others, reported as 2007 (9) SCC 481. This argument deserves to be outrightly rejected as in their statements recorded u/s 313 Cr.P.C, the appellants not only admitted to be the Directors of the Company but also admitted that they were incharge of day to day functions of the company by stating that " we did not float any further collective investment scheme and we had already repaid the investments of most of the investors". 16. Another argument which was put forth by the learned counsel for appellants was that no complaint was made by the investors to the complainant that their money had not been returned back, hence, for this reason also no liability can be fastened upon the appellants. I completely disagree with the contention of the learned counsel for the appellants as it was the mandate of the Regulation 73 and 74 that it was the appellants who had to file the winding up and repayment report. Once it was established that it has not been filed, the burden to prove that the investors had been paid lied squarely on the appellants. They having failed to file the winding up and repayment report, the complainant in my opinion has discharged its burden and proved the violation of Regulation 73 and 74 by the appellants. 17. During the course of arguments, it was also urged by the learned counsel for the appellants that the Trial Court also failed to appreciate that appellant no. 2 was not a full time Director but had been working as a Lecturer with Punjabi University, Patiala and as such she was not responsible for the day to day affairs of the company and hence, no liability can be fastened upon her. With respect to the liability of appellant no. 2, it is rather strange that despite this stand taken by appellant no. 2, she neither Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI produced any document nor stepped into the witness box to prove her claim that she was a part time Director and not responsible for the daily affairs of the company. 18. Hence, after dissecting the evidence led by CW 1, document Ex. CW1/D and from the categoric admissions of the appellants in their statements u/s 313 Cr.P.C, it can be safely held that the appellants had floated CIS after 25.01.1995 i.e on 06.02.1995 as mentioned in Ex.CW1/D. Therefore, they were to obtain registration as mandated u/s 12 (B) of the Act and in case of non registration, they were to file winding up report with SEBI in accordance with Regulation 73 of CIS Regulations. Since compliances of none of the provisions were made, the appellants being persons in charge of the office of the company were liable to be prosecuted for violation of offence punishable u/s 24 (1) read with Section 27 of SEBI Act. It can also be safely concluded that they were well aware of the public notices calling upon the companies running CIS to file information regarding its schemes, promoters of the company and the amount mobilized under the scheme which they failed to comply with. 19. To arrive at this conclusion, I am supported by the various judgments of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi which were relied upon by the learned counsel for the complainant rendered in the cases reported as Crl A Nos.1029, 1030 and 1031 of 2009 and 24 of 2010 decided on 28.08.2014 and in a case titled as Major P.C Thakur Vs Securities And Exchange Board of .... decided on 29.01.2014 wherein the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi on similar facts and circumstances had held the appellants to be liable and had convicted them under sub -section (2) of Section 27 of the SEBI Act. 20. Similar view was also taken by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in a case titled as Ankur Forest & Project Development India Limited and Others Vs SEBI reported as Criminal Appeal no.220 of 2010 decided on 08.02.2011 wherein it was observed that: Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI "11. Thus from the testimony of witnesses and the documents exhibited on record, it is proved that the company was incorporated on 20 th September, 1995 . Section 12 (1B) of the Act was inserted with effect from 21st January, 1995 wherein it was specifically provided that no person shall sponsor or cause to be sponsored or carry on or cause to be carried on any venture capital funds or Collective Investment Schemes including capital funds, unless he obtains a certificate of registration from the SEBI in accordance with the Regulations. Provision to this sub- Section deals with the companies which were already carrying such business and they were also directed that they could continue the operation till such time Regulations are made under Clause (d) of sub -Section 2 of Section 30. Thus, as on the date of incorporation, there was a clear embargo on the Appellant to sponsor or cause to be sponsored or carry or caused to be carried on any collective investment scheme without obtaining certificate of registration from the SEBI in accordance with the regulations. Only companies which were already carrying on prior to the incorporation of Section12 (1B) were permitted to continue the same till the Regulations were framed. Even those companies on the Regulations coming into operation were statutorily bound to comply them. Since the Appellant was not a Company which were carrying on the collective investment scheme as on 21st January, 1995 it could not have started the same without the certificate of registration from the SEBI. Despite the embargo, the Appellant started the CIS and thus at this stage it does not lie in the mouth of the Appellant to contend that the Regulations related to existing CIS and did not apply to it because when the Regulations came into force i.e on 15 th October, 1999 the Appellant was running a collective investment scheme and could do so without any registration or without applying for the same. Moreover, Regulation 5 (1) provides that prior to the date of coming into force of the Regulations , any person who was running an existing collective investment scheme should apply for grant of certificate within two months from such date. This Registration was also not complied with by the Appellant. Thus, there is no merit in the contention of the learned counsel that there is no violation of Regulation 68 (1) , 68 (2), 73 and 74". Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI 21. In Paramount Bio-Tech Industries Limited Vs Union of India reported as 2003 INDLAW ALL 168, the Hon'ble High Court of Allahabad had gone one step ahead and had held that: "It is true that there were no Regulations upto 1999 and, hence, certificate could not be granted under Section 12 (B). However, the proviso to Section 12 (B) permitted only those persons who were carrying on the business of collective investment scheme prior to the 1995 amendment amendment (which came into force with effect from 25 January, 1995) to continue to operate till Regulations were framed. Petitioner no. 1 was incorporated in 1996 (vide paragraph 7 to the writ petition) and, hence it was obviously not carrying on the said business before 25 January 1995. Hence, it could not get the benefit of the proviso to Section 12 (B). It follows that the business of collective investment scheme, which it was doing, was wholly illegal. The letter of the SEBI to the petitioner dated 27 February, 1998 (vide Annexure 4 to th writ petition) was thus indulgent to the petitioner. In fact, even this concession could not have been granted by the SEBI, as the proviso to Section 12 (1B) does not apply to the petitioner, for the reasons given above. The SEBI should in fact have totally prohibited the petitioner from doing the business of collective investment scheme and should have directed prosecution of the petitioner and its officials under Section 24 read with Section 27 of the SEBI Act." 22. In view of the aforesaid detailed discussion, I am of the considered opinion that the learned Trial Court had rightly convicted the appellants for offence punishable u/s 24 (1) read with Section 27 of SEBI Act of 1992. However, before parting with its order, I may add that the Learned Trial Court has taken an extremely lenient view while awarding punishment to the appellants, considering the fact that a number of investors Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI were duped of their hard earned money. Since this Court has no power to enhance the sentence awarded by the Learned Trial Court, accordingly, order of conviction dated 10.10.2014 is upheld. Announced in the open court (HEMANI MALHOTRA) Today on October 10, 2014 ADDL.SESSIONS JUDGE-05 TIS HAZARI COURTS:DELHI Criminal Appeal Sukhjot Sodhi and Another Vs SEBI
