DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG094

TITLE: Shri Rajan Gohar vs . on 26 May, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/88773201/



DOMAIN: Criminal Law

SUBDOMAIN: Criminal Justice

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, shri, rajan, gohar, financial, criminal law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI SATVIR SINGH LAMBA, MM-01 ( NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT) WEST DISTRICT, TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI Shri Rajan Gohar S/o Late Sh. Bahdra, R/o H.No. 258, NDPL Colony, Shalimar Bagh, New Delhi-110059. ......Complainant Vs. Shri Jitender Kumar R/o 227, Street No.1, Than Singh Nagar, Anand Parbat, New Delhi. ........Accused JUDGMENT Complainant Case No. : 474/1 Date of institution : 28.07.2006 Offence alleged : Under Section 138 NI Act Plea of the accused : Not pleaded guilty Final order : Conviction Date of Decision : 26.05.2014 Brief Facts 1. Brief facts of the present case are that the complainant and accused were having friendly relations with each other from last many years. It is alleged that the accused approached the complainant for a friendly loan of Rs.30,000/- and considering the need of accused as well as their friendly relations, the complainant advanced friendly loan of Rs.30,000/- to the accused. It is further alleged that in order to discharge his liability, accused issued two post dated cheques to the complainant bearing cheque bearing no.386258 dated 12.01.2006 for Rs.25,000/- i.e. Ex.CW1/1 and cheque bearing no.386251 dated 16.05.2006 for Rs.5,000/- i.e Ex.CW1/2 both drawn on State Bank of India, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi in favour of complainant. The complainant presented the cheques in question for encashment through his banker National Bank Ltd, Shalimar Bagh, Delhi but the same were got dishonored by the banker with the remarks "Funds Insufficient" vide returning memos dated 17.05.2006, which are Ex.CW1/3 and Ex.CW1/3A. Henceforth, the complainant issued the mandatory legal notice U/s 138 NI Act dated 01.06.2006 i.e. Ex.CW1/4 and the same was served upon the accused vide postal receipts, AD card and UPC. The same are Ex.CW1/5 to Ex.CW1/7. 2. When the accused failed to fulfill the conditions of the said legal notice Ex.CW1/4 within 15 days of its presumed service, then the complainant has filed the present complaint case U/s 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (hereinafter the Act) against the accused. Pre-Trial Procedure 3. After the institution of the present complaint, the complainant adduced his pre summoning evidence U/s 200 Cr. P.C. on which basis the accused was summoned via order dated 27.05.2008 to face trial for the offence U/s 138 NI Act. After the service of the summons, the accused entered his appearance whereupon the provisions of Sec. 207 Cr. P.C. were also complied. 4. The accused was admitted to bail then notice U/s 251 Cr. P.C. for the offence U/s 138 NI Act was served upon the accused on 25.09.2010 after hearing the contesting parties. Needless to say, the accused pleaded "Not Guilty" and claimed trial. Trial 5. In order to substantiate his case, the complainant lead his evidence by way of his affidavit whose contents are a mere repetition of what had already been discussed under the "Brief Facts" and hence are not repeated for the sake of brevity. However, the accused failed to disclose any reasonable grounds for the cross examination of the complainant despite opportunities, hence, the opportunity of accused was closed vide order dated 09.11.2010. 6. All the incriminating circumstances, appearing in the evidence against the accused were put in order to unable him to offer his explanation. In his explanation, the accused has not disclosed his plea of defence, however, admitted the issuance of the cheques in question as well as his signatures on the cheques in question. Accused also admitted the receiving of the legal notice and same was duly replied by him. 7. In support of his defence, accused examined four witnesses namely Sh. Vidya Bhushan, his wife Mrs. Renuka, ASI Vinay Paul, P.S. Shalimar Bagh and himself as defence witnesses. The above said defence witnesses were duly cross examined by the complainant. Thereafter, DE was closed vide order dated 20.04.2013 whereupon the trial came to a conclusion and the contesting parties were duly heard. Facts in Issue 8. In order to have the positive outcome in his favour, the complainant was required to show that the cheques Ex.CW1/1 and Ex.CW1/2 were given by the accused to discharge his liabilities which were dishonoured via returning memo's whereafter the accused had also failed to comply with the requirements of the legal notice Ex.CW1/4. 9. On the other hand, the accused was required to show his defence on the scale of preponderance of the probabilities that he is not liable to the amount involved to the complainant. Legal Prepositions 10. The presumptions provided U/s 118 NI Act and 139 NI Act would come to the rescue of the complainant once the execution of the cheque in question is proved on record. 11. As per section 118 NI Act, it is to be presumed in favour of the complainant during the trial that the cheque in question was given against consideration by the accused and that the complainant was the holder of the said cheque in due course. Further as per Sec. 139 NI Act, it is to be presumed in favour of the complainant during the trial that the cheque in question was received by the complainant against a legally enforceable debt or liability (Refer :- "Rangappa Vs. Sri Mohan" SLP (Crl.) 407/06, Dated:- 07.05.2010). 12. It is well settled that both the aforesaid presumptions U/s 118 & 139 NI Act are rebuttable in nature and the onus to rebut the same squarely rests upon the accused. 13. The accused can rebut these presumptions not merely by examining his own witnesses but also through the cross examination of the complainant and his witnesses thereby bringing on record through the entire evidence available on record (inclusive of complainant's evidence and defence evidence, if any), that the complainant was a liar, that their was no existing liabilities between the parties and that the cheque in question was misused. It must be kept in mind that once evidence is brought on record from both sides, it becomes an evidence of the case and court can draw inferences from the said entire evidence either in favour or against any of the parties. Evidence is a complainant's evidence and accused's evidence only for the purposes of identifying it, but once it is adduced in the case, it becomes the evidence of the case and then the same has to be read as a whole. The court can not read the evidence of the complainant only to the extent it favours the complainant and overlook the remaining evidence which supports the accused merely on the ground that it is the complainant's evidence. Similarly, from the evidence adduced by the accused, the court can draw inferences either in favour of the complainant or against the accused. The accused has a right to argue his case even on the basis of the cross examination of the complainant & his witnesses to show to the court that there existed no legally recoverable debt or liability between the parties. In order to rebut the legal presumption in question, it emerges that the accused need not require direct evidence to disprove the existence of consideration. 14. Preponderance of probabilities is the standard of proof upon the accused to rebut the above presumptions, which is not as high as that of the prosecution whereby the accused is only required to show the existence of a probable defence so as to rebut the above presumptions. If the accused succeeds in raising a probable defence by referring to his own evidence (if any) and from the evidence of the complainant, then the onus would shift on to the complainant, who then would have to show beyond reasonable doubt the existence of consideration/existence of a legally recoverable debt or liability in respect of the cheque in question. Appreciation of Evidence 15. The present case is proceeded on case law i.e. Rajesh Aggarwal vs. State & Anr. - MANU/DE/1838/2010, vide which it is held by hon'ble High Court of Delhi that "17. The summary trial procedure to be followed for offences under Section 138 N.I. Act would thus be as under: Step I: On the day complaint is presented, if the complaint is accompanied by affidavit of complainant, the concerned MM shall scrutinize the complaint & documents and if commission of offence is made out, take cognizance & direct issuance of summons of accused, against whom case is made out. Step II: If the accused appears, the MM shall ask him to furnish bail bond to ensure his appearance during trial and ask him to take notice under section 251 Cr.P.C. and enter his plea of defence and fix the case for defence evidence, unless an application is made by an accused under section 145(2) of N.I. Act for recalling a witness for cross-examination on plea of defence. Step III: If there is an application under Section 145(2) of N.I. Act for recalling a witness of complainant, the court shall decide the same, otherwise, it shall proceed to take defence evidence on record and allow cross-examination of defence witnesses by complainant. Step IV: To hear arguments of both sides. Step V: To pass order/judgment." 16. Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the above mentioned case emphasized that once the complainant has brought forward his case by giving his affidavit about the issuance of the cheque, dishonour of cheque, issuance of demand notice etc. he can be cross-examined only if the accused makes an application to the court as to on what point he wants to cross-examine the witnesses and then only the court shall recall the witness by recording reasons there to. 17. In a summary trial, the complainant or his witness cannot be recalled in the court for cross-examination only for the sake of pleasure. In the present complaint case after recording the plea of defence at the time of framing notice, opportunity was given to the accused for disclosing the grounds to cross examine the complainant. However, the accused has not disclosed any reasonable ground for recalling the complainant for cross-examination on his plea of defence. Therefore, there was no reason to recall the complainant or witnesses during summary trial and the evidence already given by the complainant has to be considered sufficient and his opportunity to cross examine the complainant closed vide order dated 09.11.2010. The above said order also attains finality. Thereafter, reasonable opportunities were given to the accused to lead his evidence in defence on the plea of innocence as the evidence of the complainant is already on record. 18. In order to prove his innocence, accused examined Sh. Vidya Bhushan, Advocate, Tis Hazari as DW1. DW1 stated that after completing his daily work on 26.05.2006, when he went to his seat Sh. Arvind Dua, Advocate alongwith his another friends were sitting there. DW1 stated that at about 12:00 Noon the said Arvind Dua received a telephone call from the accused informing that the accused was detained by someone near Juvenile Court Complex, Mukherjee Nagar, Delhi. Thereupon, DW1 and the said Arvind Dua reached there separately by their motorcycles. On asking, the accused told that accused and his associates had misbehaved / man handled with him. Thereafter, they reached at Mukherjee Nagar by their respective vehicles. DW1 stated that he reached the police station 10 minutes later than the accused and saw the accused, the complainant with his associates and the said Rajan were talking to each other in the presence of police officials. DW1 stated that he stayed there for 5 minutes. DW1 further stated that the complainant and accused were amicably settled the matter for payments/repayments of Rs. 1,30,000/- and gold, thereafter, he came back to Tis Hazari Courts and other persons were remained in the said police station. 19. In his cross examination, DW1 admitted that he had neither received any telephone calls from the accused nor had heard any conversation between the said Arvind Dua and the accused. DW1 further admitted that neither of them had made any written complaint to any lawful authority / bar association regarding the detention of the accused. DW1 further admitted that neither he had seen the accused in detention of any person nor misbehaved/man handled by any person. DW1 further admitted that he had not signed on the alleged settlement between the complainant and the accused in PS Mukherjee Nagar, Delhi. DW1 further admitted that no settlement was arrived between the complainant and accused in his presence and denied of knowledge by whom the alleged settlement was sent. However, all the suggestions put to him were denied. 20. Accused examined his wife Mrs. Renuka as DW2. DW2 stated in his examination in chief that she and her husband had borrowed a sum of Rs.1,30,000/- from the complainant in the month of December 2005 against the pledge of gold ornaments of weighing about 20 tolas. DW2 stated that they had returned a sum of Rs.1.0 lakh on 18.05.2006 but the complainant had refused to return the said gold ornaments. In her cross examination, DW2 admitted that no written document was prepared regarding the pledge of gold ornaments. DW2 admitted that she has not brought any bill/ receipt showing that the above said ornaments were belonging to them. DW2 further admitted that she has never raised any demand regarding the return of the above said gold ornaments. However, all the suggestions put to her were denied. 21. Accused examined ASI Vinay Paul, P.S. Shalimar Bagh as DW3 who has brought the summoned record i.e daily register dated 26.05.2006 and same is Ex.DW3/A(OSR). Cross examination of the DW3 was Nil (opportunity given). 22. Lastly accused examined himself as defence witness and stated in his chief examination that he had borrowed a sum of Rs.1,30,000/- against pledging of gold ornaments of his wife weighting around 200 grams. Accused further stated that on 18.05.2006, he had returned a sum of Rs.1.0 lakh to the complainant but the complainant refused to return his above said gold ornaments and asked remaining amount of Rs.30,000/- upon which he issued the cheques in question. Accused further stated that after taking the cheques in question the complainant refused to return the pledged gold ornaments. Accused further stated that on 26.05.2006, the complainant alongwith his brother Bittoo and three associate persons met him at Mukherjee Nagar and confine him for more then half hour upon which the police arrived and took them to the police station Mukherjee Nagar, Delhi where the complainant requested that they will amicably settle the dispute before the police officials of PS Shalimar Bagh. Accused further stated that when he went to PS Shalimar Bagh in the evening the complainant did not turn up there, thereafter, he made a written complaint Ex.DW3/A(colly 1-3 pages) in the said police station against the complainant. Accused further stated that the complainant came there and demanded Rs.1,30,000/- for returning the gold ornaments again in the PS Shalimar Bagh. Accused further stated that considering the attitude and conduct of the complainant, he had filed complaint against the complainant u/s 406/420 IPC in Rohini Courts. The certified copies of the complaint is EX.DW3/B(Colly 1-7 pages). The reply to the legal notice sent by the complainant is Ex.DW3/C (colly 1-4 pages). Ex.DW3/B (colly 1-3 pages) is the written complaint given to the PS Tis Hazari regarding the theft by complainant and his brother for Rs.30,000/- from the drawer of the accused. 23. In his cross examination, the accused admitted that he is an advocate by profession and some other cases are also pending against him regarding the dishonor of the cheques filed by different persons. Accused admitted that he had not obtained any written document/receipt from the complainant regarding the above said pledge of the gold ornaments with the complainant. DW4 further admitted that he had not obtained any receipts from the complainant regarding the payment of Rs.1.0 lakh to him. Accused further admitted that he could not produce any document regarding the alleged PCR call or taking of them to police station Mukherjee Nagar, Delhi by the concerned police officials. Accused admitted that he had not filed any civil suit regarding the above said pledged gold ornaments despite aware of legal remedies. However, all the suggestions put to him were denied. 24. It is argued by the Ld. counsel for complainant that from evidence on record, the complainant has proved that cheques in question were signed by the accused which were dishonoured vide bank memos and despite the legal notice accused did not make the payment. It is argued that the accused failed to cross examine the complainant, hence, nothing material has come out and the complainant has been able to prove his case. It is further argued that accused has failed to discharge the burden upon him to rebutt the presumption in favour of the complainant under the Act. 25. Now the question is whether the complainant proved his case, that whether the amount was legally enforceable debt. Offence under Section 138 of the Act is a technical offence and the complainant is only supposed to prove that the cheques issued by the accused were dishonoured, his statement that cheques were issued against liability or debt is sufficient proof of the debt or liability and the onus shifts to the accused to show the circumstances under which the cheques were issued and this could be proved by the accused only by way of cogent evidence. 26. Ld. Counsel for accused argued that the present case is false and frivolous and had concealed material facts from the court. Ld. Counsel for accused argued that accused had availed a sum of Rs,.1,30,000/- instead of Rs.30,000/- from the complainant upon the pledging of gold ornaments of his wife weighing around 20 tolas. Ld. Counsel for accused further argued that despite receiving of the substantial amount of the said loan, the complainant has not returned the gold ornaments of accused. It is further argued that the complainant is misusing the cheques in question with intention to harass the accused and by grabbing the gold ornaments of his wife. 27. Accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The accused may adduce direct evidence/evidence on preponderance of probabilities to prove that cheques in question were not supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be discharged by him. However, there is no need that the accused should disprove the non existence of consideration and debt by leading direct evidence because the existence of negative evidence is neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time it is clear that bare denial of the passing of the consideration and existence of debt, apparently would not serve the purpose of the accused. Something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the complainant. 28. From the material on record, it is established that the complainant and accused were known to each other and were having friendly relations among themselves. The issuance of the cheques in question is not disputed by the accused. It is further established on record that the cheques in question issued by the accused got dishonored vide bank memo. The signatures on the cheques in question are not disputed by the accused at all. It is also established on record that the cheques in question pertains to the account of the accused. The legal notice sent by the complainant was received by the accused and same was duly replied by him. 29. The testimony of DW2 reveals that she and her husband had availed a sum of Rs.1,30,000/- from the accused in December 2005, however, the accused stated in his examination in chief that he availed the said loan amount by way of four installments from the period during December 2005 to March 2006. The alleged averments are inconsistent and contrary to each other. Further the alleged loan was obtained from the complainant against the pledging of the gold ornaments of wife of accused with the complainant. Interestingly, the wife of the accused was not aware of the date of borrowing money, the date of pledging of the said gold ornaments. Moreover, the accused has failed to produce on record any bill / receipt showing that the above said gold ornaments were belonging to them. Further the accused has not furnished on record any document/ proof regarding the payment of Rs.1.0 lakh on 18.05.2006 to the complainant. It is particular to mention here that DW2 who has never raised any demand to the complainant regarding the return of the said gold ornaments. The accused has admitted that he has not filed any civil suit regarding the recovery of the above said gold ornaments. It is explained by the accused and his wife that the above said gold ornaments was her stridhan, however, the accused and his wife has failed to produce any document which shows that the alleged gold ornaments were of 20 tolas or they have ever purchased the alleged gold ornaments nor has brought any photographs which shows that the above said gold ornaments were given to her in her marriage. 30. The plea of defence raised by the accused that the complainant had stolen a sum of Rs.30,000/- from his drawer or that the complainant is demanding a sum of Rs.1,60,000/- for the amicable settlement are neither relevant nor related regarding the rebuttal of the presumptions in favour of the complainant regarding the cheques in question. The alleged averments does not bear any relevancy in proving the innocence of the accused towards the dishonoring of the cheques in question. The testimony of the DW1 regarding the alleged amicable settlement in the police station Mukherjee Nagar is not believable because no written compromise/agreement as alleged by the accused was furnished on record during the trial of the present case. Further the DW1 has admitted that no amicable talks took place between the complainant and accused in his presence. Moreso, DW1 has admitted that neither he has signed any agreement regarding the compromise between complainant and accused nor knows by whom the alleged agreement/compromise was signed. 31. The plea and the defence taken up by the accused that the cheques in question had been given by him to the complainant for the returning of the alleged gold ornaments is of no consequence. The accused has admitted the signatures on the cheques in question. On the one hand, the accused is admitting that his liability towards the accused was of Rs.1,30,000/- out of which he has already repaid the amount of Rs.1.0 lakh. It is pertinent to mention here that the accused has not produced any iota of evidence regarding the alleged repayment to the complainant. Considering the plea of defence of the accused, it can be inferred that he is admitting the liability of Rs.30,000/- and same was never repaid to the complainant at any point of time. Once he has admitted his signatures on the cheques in question he cannot escaped from his liability on the ground that same has been issued only for the returning of the alleged gold ornaments. When a cheque is signed and handed over it means that the person signing it, has given implied authority to the holder of the cheque for its encashment towards the liability. This shows that cheques had been issued to discharge the alleged liability. It is pertinent to mention here that the cheques in question were dishonored due to funds insufficient instead of any other reason if the accused was of apprehension that the complainant might misuse the cheques he might have intimated his banker for stop payments to avoid the misuse of the cheques but it was not the case in present facts and circumstances. 32. Therefore, mere pleading not guilty would not amount to rebutting the presumption raised under Section 139 of N.I Act. In the present case accused has not produced any cogent proof in support of his innocence which makes it improbable that the cheques in question were not issued towards the discharge of legal liability as alleged by the complainant but at the same time strengthens the foundation fabrics of the present complaint case. In the present case, the accused failed to raise a cogent suspicious circumstances in the version of the complainant which belies the foundation of the present complaint case. Further, nothing has been proved by the accused to show that the cheques in question were misused by the complainant and that he did not have the legally enforceable liability towards the complainant. Conclusion 33. Having considered the testimonies the issuance of cheque was not in dispute which were dishonored by bank returning memo. Accused is served with legal notice through registered post within the stipulated period and despite that no payment has been made by him. 34. Reading of the evidence on record in its entirety, would show that the evidence is not supportive with the innocence of the accused and as such same is li- able to be dismissed out rightly. Secondly, accused has not produced any cogent proof in support of his defence on record. This court is of the opinion that the defence set up is neither definitive nor consistent with innocence of the accused. It is liability of the accused to bring positive evidence, in the wake of denying the liability by bringing evidence showing that accused has no liability towards complainant in the present complaint. It was sole burden and duty of the accused to prove no liability by raising probable defence when he was defending presumption, which was supporting the dis- honoured cheque. The accused has failed to discharge the onus. 35. For rebutting the presumptions under the 'Act', a just need is to raise a probable defence. However, in the present case accused not only failed to show pre- ponderance of probability in his favour but also not succeeded in discharging his ini- tial burden for rebutting the presumption under the NI Act by not leading any cogent evidence in his support. Thus, this court unhesitatingly holds that the accused has not been able to rebut the presumptions under section 139 and 118 NI Act standing in favour of complainant. 36. Having considered the entire evidence, complainant successfully proved all the essential requirements of Section 138 of the Act. Accordingly, accused is guilty for committing the offence punishable u/s 138 of the Act, he is hereby convict- ed for the offence under section 138 of the Act. Let he be heard on point of sentence separately. Announced in open court on SATVIR SINGH LAMBA 26th Day of May, 2014 MM-01(NI ACT)WEST/DELHI
