DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG103

TITLE: Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar vs . Surat Singh Page 1/12 on 22 July, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/12146852/



DOMAIN: Property and Land Law

SUBDOMAIN: Land and Property Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, case, surender, kumar, surat, singh, page, july, financial, property and land law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI RAVINDER SINGH­II METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE DWARKA COURTS, NEW DELHI Case No. : 5054/14 Unique Case ID No. : 0240SR0271382011 Surender Kumar S/o Sh. Ishwar Singh R/o VPO Kapashera, New Delhi. ...................................Complainant Versus Surat Singh S/o Sh. Ram Pat R/o H. No. 573, Mata Wali Gali, Kapashera Village, New Delhi­110037. ....................................Accused Date of Institution: 12.09.2011 Plea of the accused: Pleaded Not Guilty Date of Reserving Judgment: 07/07/2014 Sentence or final Order: Convicted Date of Judgment: 22/07/2014 JUDGMENT BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE CASE 1. By way of the present judgment, I shall decide the complaint case U/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (hereinafter Said as NI Act) filed by the complainant Sh. Surender Kumar against the accused Sh. Surat Singh S/o Sh. Ram Pat. PROLOGUE (COMPLAINANT'S VERSION) 2. The encapsulated facts as perceptible from the complaint are that the complainant and the accused person both are resident of same village and allegedly had good friendly relations. It is alleged that Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 1/12 relations between the complainant and the accused were so cordial that when the accused person was in need of money the complainant gave him a sum of Rs. 8 lacs as friendly loan on 05.02.2011 for six months. It is further alleged that the accused did not pay the above said loan to the complainant even by the month of June, 2011 despite repeated request and demand of the complainant. It is further alleged that in the first week of June, 2011 the accused person showed his inability to pay the said loan and requested the complainant to wait for one­two weeks. It is further alleged that the accused also told the complainant that he was planning to sell his house to repay the loan of the complainant and other creditors. It is further alleged that the accused could not find any suitable buyer for his house and as such on 18.06.2011 he requested the complainant to purchase his house for a sum of Rs. 20 lacs. It is further alleged that for the sake of recovery of his loan the complainant accepted the offer of the accused. It is further alleged that the complainant purchased the house of the accused bearing No. 573, Mata Wali Gali, VPO Kapashera, New Delhi for a sum of Rs. 20 lacs on 28.06.2011. It is further alleged that an amount of Rs. 12 lacs was paid to the accused and Rs. 8 lacs earlier given as a loan was also adjusted. It is further alleged that on 28.06.2011 the complainant also executed General Power of Attorney (GPA), Agreement to Sell, receipts for a sum of Rs. 20 lacs, affidavit, possession letter as sale documents of the above said property. It is further alleged that the possession of the said property was also handed over by the accused to the complainant. It is further alleged that the accused persons have also handed over the original GPA which was executed by the accused in favour of his wife. It is further alleged that the accused also informed the complainant that he has no title in his favour as the house is ancestral property and is situated in abadi area of Village Kapashera. It is further alleged that on 03.07.2011 the accused came to the house of the complainant and told him that his wife and other relatives have objected to the sale of the above said house and as such he requested the complainant to cancel the deal and also offered to return the consideration amount. It is further alleged that the complainant in consultation with his parents and brother agreed to cancel the deal. It is Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 2/12 further alleged that it was agreed that the accused would return the entire amount of Rs. 20 lacs to the complainant by way of cheque and the complainant also agreed to return the possession of the property back to the accused and his family. It is further alleged that it was also agreed that original documents would be returned by the complainant only after encashment of cheques. It is further alleged that as per settlement and in order to return the consideration amount the accused issued three cheques bearing no. 527011, 527012 & 527013 dated 10.07.2011, 15.07.2011 &.19.07.2011 amounting to Rs. 8,00,000/­, Rs. 8,00,000/­ and Rs. 4,00,000/­ respectively all drawn on Standard Chartered Bank, Gurgaon branch, in favour of the complainant. It is further alleged that the complainant also handed over the possession of the said property to the accused person and the accused is still residing at the said property. It is further alleged that the accused requested the complainant to present the said cheques for encashment after 2­3 weeks. It is further alleged that thereafter complainant presented the aforesaid cheques in question for encashment with its banker State Bank of India, Kapashera Branch on 20.07.2011 and the same were dishonoured vide cheque returning memo's all dated 21.07.2011 all with remarks "Account Closed". It is further alleged that thereafter the complainant has given a legal notice of demand dated 29.07.2011 to the accused which was sent to the accused through registered post thereby calling upon the accused to make the payment of the cheques amount. It is further alleged that the accused has failed to pay any sum in response to the legal notice of demand and false and frivolous reply dated 19.08.2011 was given by the accused as a result of which the complainant has filed the present complaint for prosecution of the accused U/s 138 of the NI Act. 3. After the complaint was filed, the complainant Surender Kumar led his pre­summoning evidence by way of an affidavit and after hearing the counsel for the complainant and considering the entire material and documents on record, summons were issued against the accused by the court vide order dated 14.09.2011 for the offence U/s 138 of NI Act. On Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 3/12 appearance of the accused a separate notice U/s 251 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (hereinafter said as the Code) dated 05.11.2012 was given to the accused to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Thereafter, the accused moved an application under section 145(2) of the NI Act and the said application of the accused was allowed and the matter was listed for complainant's evidence. COMPLAINANT'S EVIDENCE 4. The complainant Surender Kumar got himself examined as CW1 and adopted his pre summoning evidence affidavit Ex. CW1/A. CW­1 also relied upon documents Ex. CW1/1 to Ex. CW1/13. Ex. CW1/1 is the original General Power of Attorney, Ex. CW1/2 is the original Agreement to Sell, Ex. CW1/3 is the receipt of Rs. 20 lacs, Ex. CW1/4 is the affidavit of the complainant, Ex. CW1/5 is the possession letter, Ex. CW1/6 Ex. CW1/7 & Ex. CW1/8 are the original cheque's in question, Ex. CW1/9, Ex. CW1/10 and Ex. CW1/11 are the cheque returning memos, Ex. CW1/12 is the legal notice of demand dated 29.07.2011, Ex. CW1/13 is the postal receipt. 5. The complainant also examined three other witnesses. Sh. Vijay Kumar as CW­2, Sh. Jagdish as CW­3 and Sh. Jai Prakash as CW­4. All the complainant's witnesses were duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused. Thereafter, the complainant's evidence was closed at request of the complainant. STATEMENT OF ACCUSED U/S 313 OF THE CODE 6. Thereafter the statement of accused was recorded U/s 313 of the Code in which all the incriminating evidence along with exhibited documents were put to the accused Surat Singh. The accused denied that he has taken any loan from the complainant. The accused further stated that the documents Ex. CW1/1 to Ex. CW1/5 were got executed by the complainant from him under coercion. The accused further denied that Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 4/12 he has made any statement to the complainant on 03.07.2011 regarding his not having title to the property. The accused further denied that he has requested the complainant to cancel the deal. The accused further denied that he has agreed to return the amount of Rs. 20 lacs through cheques. The accused further submitted that the cheques in question bears his signatures but also stated that the complainant has pressurized him to sign the same. The accused also stated that the cheques were blank and were obtained by the complainant under threat to his life and with the aid of three to four persons including the brother of the complainant Rajesh and Sonu. The accused further submitted that he is not aware about the dishonor of the cheques in question. The accused further submitted that he has received the legal demand notice and has replied the same. Accused also stated that the complainant has filed a complaint case against him and the witnesses have also deposed against him falsely. The accused also stated that he has no direct transactions or concern with the complainant and one Meena who is his neighbour had certain transactions with the complainant and it is only then he came to know about the complainant. It is further submitted that the said Meena had failed to make payment to the complainant and she has also shifted her residence. It is further submitted that the said Meena has not paid the amount of the complainant and the complainant caught hold of him and also pressurized him for making the payment and has also instituted the present complaint case to harrass him. The accused further submitted that he has also filed a complaint against the complainant in Dwarka Courts and he do not owe any liability towards the complainant. The accused altogether denied all his liability towards the complainant. Thereafter the case was fixed for defence evidence. DEFENCE EVIDENCE. 7. The accused examined himself as a defence witness DW­1. The defence witness DW­1 was duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the complainant. Thereafter defence evidence was closed at request of the accused and the case was listed for final arguments. Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 5/12 FINAL ARGUMENTS 8. Final arguments were addressed on behalf of both the parties. I have heard Ld. Counsels for both the parties and perused the entire record of the case file. Before proceeding further it is imperative for me to go through the relevant provisions of law. Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act provides that: "Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc, of funds in the account:Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in while or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation:For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability. APPRECIATION OF EVIDENCE IN THE LIGHT OF THE INGREDIENTS OF SECTION 138 OF THE NI ACT AND THE DEFENCE RAISED BY THE ACCUSED Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 6/12 9. It is not disputed by the accused that the Cheque's in Question Ex. CW1/6, Ex. CW1/7 and Ex. CW1/8 are drawn on the account maintained by him. Further signatures on the cheque's in question has also not been disputed by the accused. Further the presentation, dishonor of the cheque's in question and the cheque returning memos have also not been challenged by the accused. Therefore in view of the evidence on record it stands proved that the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/6, Ex. CW1/7 and Ex. CW1/8 were signed by the accused and the same were drawn on account maintained by him. Further it also stands duly proved that the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/6, Ex. CW1/7 and Ex. CW1/8 were dishonored vide cheque returning memo Ex. CW1/9, Ex. CW1/10 and Ex. CW1/11 all with the reason "Account Closed". Further the receipt of legal demand notice Ex. CW1/12 dated 29.07.2011 has also been admitted by the accused both at the time of framing of notice U/s 251 of the Code and also in his statement U/s 313 of the Code. Therefore, in light of the admission of the accused the service of the legal demand notice upon the accused also stands proved. 10. From the perusal of the entire evidence it has come to fore that the only defence which has been taken by the accused is that he has never taken any loan of Rs. 8 lacs from the complainant and he has also never entered into any transaction with the complainant in respect of his property bearing No. 573, Mata Wali Gali, VPO Kapashera, New Delhi for Rs. 20 lacs and the property documents and the cheques in question were got executed by the complainant from him forcefully. 11. Before I advert to the said line of the defence taken by the accused it is imperative for me to go through the provisions of Sections 118(a) and 139 of the Act which read as under: --Until the contrary is proved, the following pre­ sumptions shall be made­ (a) of consideration.--that every negotiable instru­ Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 7/12 ment was made or drawn for consideration, and that every such instrument when it has been ac­ cepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for consideration;" "139. Presumption in favour of holder.--It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque, of the na­ ture referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability." 12. The Division bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Krishna Janard­ han Bhat v. Dattatraya G. Hegde, (2008) 4 SCC 54, has held that the ac­ cused can discharge the burden of presumption U/s 118 and U/s 139 of the NI Act by raising a probable defence on the strength of 'preponder­ ance of probabilities'. 13. In Rangappa Versus Sri Mohan AIR 2010 SC 1898 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is a settled position that when an accused has to rebut the presumption under Section 139, the standard of proof for doing so is that of `preponderance of probabilities'. Therefore, if the accused is able to raise a probable defence which creates doubts about the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution can fail. 14. From the reading of the above said provisions and the judgments the position of law which emerges is that once execution of the promis­ sory note is admitted, the presumption under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act would arise that it is supported by a consideration. Such a presumption is rebuttable in nature. The accused can prove the non­ existence of a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the accused discharges the initial onus of proof by showing that the existence of con­ sideration was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the Complainant who will be obliged to prove it as a mat­ ter of fact and upon its failure to prove would disentitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. The burden upon the accused of proving the non­existence of the consideration can be either Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 8/12 direct or by bringing on record the preponderance of probabilities by ref­ erence to the circumstances upon which he relies. In case, where the ac­ cused fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non­exis­ tence of the consideration, the complainant would invariably be held en­ titled to the benefit of presumption arising under Section 118(a) and Sec­ tion 139 of the NI Act in his favour. 15. Now coming back to the case in hand, in the instant case the complainant has examined himself as CW­1 and stated that initially he has granted loan of Rs. 8 lacs to the accused and when the accused showed his inability to return the loan the accused himself came out with the proposal to sell off his property bearing No. 573, Mata Wali Gali, VPO Kapashera, New Delhi for a sum of Rs. 20 lacs on 18.06.2011, which he agreed and documents were executed and an amount of Rs. 12 lacs were also given by him to the accused after adjusting the loan of Rs. 8 lacs vide agreement dated 28.06.2011. To support his claim the complainant has also produced the witnesses of the said sale transaction i.e. Vijay Kumar and Jagdish as CW­2 and CW­3 respectively. Both CW­2 and CW­3 stated that the sale transaction in respect of property bearing No. 573, Mata Wali Gali, VPO Kapashera, New Delhi was carried out between the complainant and the accused and documents Ex. CW1/1 to Ex. CW1/5 were also executed by the accused and the complainant in their presence. Further both CW­2 and CW­3 denied that the accused was forced to sign the sale documents and also denied that the cheques in question were taken forcibly by the complainant from the accused. The complainant further has also examined one Jaiprakash as CW­4 and the said witness stated that the complainant has borrowed money from him for the said sale transactions. In contrary the accused has stated that he has never taken any loan of Rs. 8 lacs from the complainant and he has also never entered into any transaction with the complainant in respect of his property for Rs. 20 lacs. It is also stated by the accused that the property documents and the cheques in question were got executed by the complainant from him forcefully. To corroborate his stand, the accused has examined himself as DW­1 and denied the allegations of the Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 9/12 complainant and stated that one Meena Neniwal who was running the society in the name of Meena Neniwal PACL was having transactions with the complainant and as the said Meena Neniwal failed to make payment to the complainant, the complainant started forcing him and on 28.06.2011 the complainant and his brother took him forcibly behind SDM office Kapashera and got his signatures on the blank papers and also on the cheques. It is further stated by the accused that he also lodged complaints against the complainant at PS Kapashera and a Panchayat was also held on 04.07.2011 wherein the complainant agreed to hand over the documents and the cheques in question of the accused. Now even believing the stand of the accused to be correct it is surprising to see that it is the own case of the accused that he was forcibly taken by the complainant and his brother on 28.06.2011 and he has made a complaint to PS Kapashera on 01.07.2011. Interestingly no such complaint or application has been produced by the accused on record. Neither any witness has been examined by the accused in proof of the same. Further it is also highly inconceivable that when a person has been forcibly taken by some persons and was also made to execute certain documents that too of his property then he would wait for two days for approaching the police authorities as has admittedly happened in the present complaint case. Further it is also interesting to note that alleged second complaint filed by the accused Ex. DW1/1 to the police authorities is dated 08.08.2011 whereas the legal demand notice which has been sent by the complainant to the accused is dated 29.07.2011 which admittedly has been received and also replied by the accused which makes it apparently clear that the same is an after thought. Further the complaint Ex. DW1/2 filed by the accused against the complainant before Dwarka Courts was also instituted on 26.08.2011 ie after receiving the legal demand notice from the complainant. Further the accused has neither examined any panchayat personals nor has examined the said Meena Neniwal from whom the complainant was having transactions. Furthermore, it cannot be even presumed that when a person is having visiting terms with any debtor (Meena Neniwal in this case) the creditors would forcibly take any person with whom the debtor is having visiting terms. Further the Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 10/12 accused has not even tendered in evidence the reply allegedly sent by him to the legal demand notice of the complainant. Perusal of the entire evidence reveals that except denials and suggestions to the complainant's witnesses the accused has not lead any cogent evidence to corroborate his stand and dent the stand of the complainant. It is trite to say that mere denial on the part of the accused and putting suggestions to the complainant's witness and giving explanations without leading any defence to corroborate his stand would not absolve him from any liability. It was for the accused to prove the circumstances under which the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/6, Ex. CW1/7 and Ex. CW1/8 were issued by him by leading cogent evidence so as to discharge and rebut the presumption raised against him by the Statute U/s 139 and 118 (a) of the NI Act and mere simplicitor denying the allegations would not be at his advantage. The accused has not brought any material on record and also no cogent explanations or any probable defence which would rebut the shadow of presumption existing in favour of the complainant. Therefore, this court do not find any force in the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the accused that he has succeeded in rebutting the presumption raised against the accused under Section 139 of the Act. 16. From the materials brought on record and evidence lead by the complainant it is sufficient to hold that the accused has taken loan from the complainant and has also entered into sale transaction with the com­ plainant in respect of his property and further has also issued the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/6, Ex. CW1/7 & Ex. CW1/8 in discharge of his liability. 17. Considering the evidence on record, It stands duly proved that the accused has miserably failed to rebut the presumptions U/s 118 (a) and section 139 of the NI Act. Furthermore, accused has also failed to prove that he has made payment to the complainant within 15 days from the receipt of the legal demand notice. Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 11/12 18. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I hereby hold that the complainant has proved and substantiated its allegation against the accused and all the ingredients of Section 138 of NI Act also stands proved against the accused. Accordingly, Surat Singh S/o Ram Pat is hereby convicted for the offence u/s 138 of the NI Act. This judgment contains 12 pages. Every Page of this judgment has been signed by me Copy of this judgment be given to the convict free of cost. Announced in the open Court (RAVINDER SINGH ­II) Dated 22.07.2014 MM (NI Act ­07) DWARKA/NEW DELHI. Case No. : 5054/14 Surender Kumar Vs. Surat Singh Page 12/12
