DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG136

TITLE: Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel vs Virender Singh Page No. 1/14 on 15 October, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/32716735/



DOMAIN: Property and Land Law

SUBDOMAIN: Land and Property Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, case, shankar, goel, virender, singh, page, october, financial, property and land law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI RAVINDER SINGH­II METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE DWARKA COURTS, NEW DELHI Case No. : 2815/12 Unique Case ID No: 02405R0465642010 Uma Shankar Goel S/o Shri A.P.L. Goel R/o. WZ­1008, Nagal Raya New Delhi­110046 ..........................................Complainant Versus Virender Singh S/o Late Sh. Tek chand Solanki R/o RZ­422/294, Gali No. 12 Shivpuri, West Sagarpur New Delhi­110046 .........................................Accused Date of Institution: 21.12.2010 Plea of the accused: Pleaded Not Guilty Date of Reserving Judgment: 01/10/2014 Sentence or final Order: Convicted Date of Judgment: 15/10/2014 JUDGMENT BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE CASE 1. By way of the present judgment, I shall decide the complaint case U/s 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (hereinafter Said as NI Act) filed by the complainant Sh. Uma Shankar Goel against the accused Virender Singh S/o Late Sh. Tek Chand Solanki. PROLOGUE (COMPLAINANT'S VERSION) 2. The factual matrix necessary for disposal of the present case as per the allegations in the complaint are that the accused entered Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 1/14 into an agreement with the complainant dated 01.09.2009 for selling of the property No. RZ 50 G, land measuring 200 Sq. Yards comprising of Khasra No. 22/8/2, 9/2 and 10/1/2 situated in the area of Village Dabri in the abadi known as Vashisht Park New Delhi­110046 (hereinafter said property RZ 50 G) and received a sum of Rs. 7,00,000/­ as part payment. It is further alleged by the complainant that the balance payment was to be received by the accused at the time of registration of necessary documents and delivery of physical possession. It is further alleged that the accused informed the complainant that the said property is under litigation and as such he would first the settle the litigation and thereafter would transfer the property in question. It is further alleged that the accused thereafter had been putting off the complainant on one pretext or other and ultimately it came to the notice of the complainant that the accused person has transferred the said property to a third party after clearance of the court litigation. It is further alleged that thereafter the complainant contacted the accused person and he agreed to pay the amount given by the complainant amounting to Rs. 7,00,000/­ along with interest @ 24% per annum. It is further alleged that to show his bonafide the accused issued two cheques of Rs. 1,00,000/­ each in the month of April, 2010. It is further alleged that out of the said two cheques, one cheque was encashed on presentation and the other cheque bearing no. 740142 dated 18.04.2010 drawn on HDFC Bank, Dwarka, New Delhi (cheque in question) on presentation was dishonored on the account of "Insufficient Funds". It is further alleged that thereafter the complainant has given a legal demand notice dated 10.11.2010 to the accused which was sent to the accused through registered post and UPC on 11.11.2010 thereby calling upon the accused to make the payment of the cheque amount of Rs. 1,00,000/­ and also the balance of Rs. 6,96,000/­ including the interest. It is alleged that the accused has received the legal demand notice and despite the receipt of the same has failed to pay any sum in response to the legal notice of demand as a result of which the complainant has filed the present Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 2/14 complaint for prosecution of the accused U/s 138 of the NI Act. COMPLAINANT'S EVIDENCE 3. The complainant Uma Shanker Goel got himself examined as CW­1 and tendered his post summoning evidence affidavit Ex. CW1/A. CW­1/1 also relied upon documents Ex. CW1/1 to Ex. CW1/5. Ex. CW1/1 is the copy of the agreement dated 01.09.2009, Ex. CW1/2 is the original cheque in question, Ex. CW1/2A is the cheque returning memo, Ex. CW1/3 is the legal notice of demand notice, Ex. CW1/4 is the UPC receipt, and Ex.CW1/5 is the registered post receipt. 4. The complainant also examined Sh. Tejpal Singh as CW­2. CW­2 tendered his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. CW2/A. CW­2 got exhibited receipt for a sum of Rs. 5,00,000/­ dated 01.09.2009 as Ex. CW2/1 and another receipt of Rs. 2,00,000/­ as Ex. CW2/2. Both CW­1 and CW­2 were duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused. Thereafter, the complainant's evidence was closed at request. STATEMENT OF THE ACCUSED U/S 313 OF THE CODE 5. Thereafter the statement of accused was recorded U/s 313 of the Code in which all the incriminating evidence along with exhibited documents were put to the accused Virender Singh. The accused stated that he has never executed any agreement with the complainant regarding the sale of property bearing no. RZ­50G, Khasra No. 22/8/2, 9/2 and 10/1/2 situated in village Dabri Delhi. The accused further stated that he has never taken any amount of Rs. 7,00,000/­ from the complainant as alleged. The accused further stated that he has taken a loan of Rs. 3,00,000/­ from the complainant in the year 2009 which he has already repaid. The accused further stated that the complainant has made him sign on blank papers at the time of Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 3/14 taking of the loan. The accused further denied that he informed the complainant about the litigation pending against the property. The accused also denied that he informed the complainant that he will first settle the litigation against the said property and then he would transfer the same to the complainant. The accused further stated that he has never given any cheques to complainant regarding the return of any amount taken as earnest amount of the said property. It is further stated by the accused that when he met the complainant for payment of the part amount the complainant asked him to give two cheques for the payment of balance amount. It is further stated by the accused that out of the said two cheques one cheque was encashed and the second cheque was presented by the complainant despite the payments made by him to the complainant by cash. The accused further stated that he has already repaid the entire loan amount and the complaint has mischievously presented the cheque in question despite the fact that he has already informed the complainant that he was not having sufficient balance in his account. The accused further admitted that the cheque in question bears his signature. The accused further denied the receipt of the legal demand notice, however he admitted that the address mentioned on the legal demand notice is his correct address. The accused also denied having any liability towards complainant. The accused further stated that no agreement was executed between him and the complainant and the question of signing of the receipts by the complainant witness Tejpal Singh does not arise. The accused further stated that the present complaint case has been wrongly and falsely instituted against him and the complainant witnesses have deposed against him falsely. The accused also stated that he has repaid his loan of Rs. 3,00,000/­ which he has taken from the complainant. The accused also stated that he has been falsely implicated in the present complaint case. The accused also stated that when he made part payment of Rs. 1,44,000/­ to the complainant out of the loan amount of Rs. 3,00,000/­, the complainant and one Vijender asked him to hand over two cheques of Rs. 1,00,000/­ Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 4/14 each to the complainant which he gave to the complainant. It is further stated by the accused that out of the said two cheques one cheque was encashed and he paid the remaining amount to the complainant by way of cash. The accused further stated that on the date of return of the loan amount, he asked the complainant to return his second cheque but the complainant asked him to come again for the return of the cheque. The accused further denied all his liability towards the complainant. Thereafter the case was fixed for defence evidence. DEFENCE EVIDENCE 6. Accused examined himself as a defence witness DW­1. DW­1 was duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the complainant. Thereafter defence evidence was closed at request of the accused and the case was listed for final arguments. FINAL ARGUMENTS 7. Final arguments were addressed on behalf of both the parties. I have heard Ld. Counsels for both the parties and have also perused the entire record of the case file. Before proceeding further it is imperative for me to go through the relevant provisions of law. Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act provides that: "Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc, of funds in the account:Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in while or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two years, or with Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 5/14 fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation:For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability. APPRECIATION OF EVIDENCE IN THE LIGHT OF THE INGREDIENTS OF SECTION 138 OF THE NI ACT AND THE DEFENCE RAISED BY THE ACCUSED 8. The issuance of the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 to the complainant by the accused has not been disputed. It is also not disputed by the accused that the cheque in Question Ex. CW1/2 is drawn on the account maintained by him. Further signature on the cheque in question CW1/2 has also not been disputed by the accused. The presentation, dishonor of the cheque in question and the cheque returning memo has also not been challenged by the accused. Therefore, In light of the evidence on record it stands duly proved that the cheque in question Ex CW1/2 is issued by the accused from his own account and the same is also signed by the accused. Further it also stands duly proved that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 was dishonored vide cheque returning memo Ex. CW1/2A with the reason "Insufficient Funds". Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 6/14 9. From the perusal of the entire evidence it has come to the fore that two fold defence has been taken by the accused. Firstly, that he has not been served with the legal demand notice by the complainant and Secondly that he has never entered into any property transaction with the complainant and the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 has also not been issued by him to the complainant for return of any consideration amount in respect of the property transaction as alleged by the complainant. 10. Coming to the first line of defence taken by the accused that he has not been served with the legal demand notice from the complainant, it is pertinent to note that the complainant as CW­1 has specifically stated in his affidavit Ex. CW1/A that the complainant has got issued the legal notice of demand dated 10.11.2010 to the accused which is Ex. CW1/3 and it was sent to the accused on 11.11.2010 vide registered Post and UPC. CW­1 has also tendered in evidence the UPC receipt as Ex. CW1/4 and the registered post receipt as Ex.CW1/5. 11. The accused has denied the receipt of the legal demand Ex. CW1/3 in his statement U/s 313 of the Code and also during his cross examination as DW­1. I have perused the legal notice of demand Ex. CW1/3. It bears the same address of the accused as mentioned by the complainant in the complaint. Interestingly, the accused during his cross examination as DW­1 has admitted that the complaint and the legal demand notice Ex. CW1/3 bears his correct address. Further the same address has been furnished by the accused on his bail bond. Further the complainant has also placed on record the registered post and UPC receipts issued by the postal authorities in ordinary course vide which the legal demand notice has been sent to the accused. Therefore it is evident that the legal demand notice Ex. CW1/3 has been sent at the correct address of the accused. It is trite to say that when there is service of notice by post on the correct address which evidently has taken place in the present case there is always a Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 7/14 presumption that the legal demand notice has been duly served upon the accused unless some concrete evidence in rebuttal is adduced by the accused to establish that the Legal Demand Notice has not been served upon him. It was for the accused to rebut the presumption about the service of notice and show that he had no knowledge that the notice was brought to his address or that the address mentioned on the notice was incorrect or that the notice was never tendered or that the postal receipts placed on record by the complainant are incorrect. Except denials the accused has not any lead any evidence to corroborate his stand. Moreover, In "C.C. Alavi Hazi Vs. Palapetty Mohd. & Anr." Reported in (2007) 6 Supreme Court case 555, it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the course open to the drawer where he claims not to have received the notice sent by post but has received copy of the complaint with the summons is that he can within 15 days of the receipt of summons make payment of the cheque amount and he then cannot contend that there was no proper service of notice, which evidently the accused in the instant case has not done despite receiving of the summons. As such non receipt of legal demand notice as a defence on part of the accused has no force. 12. Coming to the second line of defence taken by the accused that he has never entered into any property transaction with the complainant and the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 has also not been issued by him to the complainant for return of any consideration amount in respect of the property transaction as alleged by the complainant. 13. Before I advert to the above said defence taken by the accused, it is imperative for me to go through the provisions of Sections 118(a) and 139 of the Act which read as under: "118. Presumptions as to negotiable instru­ ments.--Until the contrary is proved, the fol­ lowing presumptions shall be made­ (a) of consideration.--that every negotiable Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 8/14 instrument was made or drawn for considera­ tion, and that every such instrument when it has been accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiat­ ed or transferred for consideration;" "139. Presumption in favour of holder.--It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque, of the nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. 14. The Division bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Krishna Janardhan Bhat Vs. Dattatraya G. Hegde, (2008) 4 SCC 54, has held that the accused can discharge the burden of presumption U/s 118 and U/s 139 of the NI Act by raising a probable defence on the strength of preponderance of probabilities. The relevant portion of the said judgment is reproduced here under (Paras 32 & 34): "32. An accused for discharging the burden of proof placed upon him under a statute need not examine himself. He may discharge his burden on the basis of the materials already brought on record. An accused has a constitutional right to maintain silence. Standard of proof on the part of the accused and that of the prosecution in a criminal case is different. 34. Furthermore, whereas prosecution must prove the guilt of an accused beyond all reasonable doubt, the standard of proof so as to prove a defence on the part of the accused is 'preponderance of probabilities'. Inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only from the materials brought on record by the parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies." 15. In Rangappa Vs. Sri Mohan AIR 2010 SC 1898 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is a settled position that when an ac­ cused has to rebut the presumption under Section 139, the standard of proof for doing so is that of "preponderance of probabilities". Therefore, if the accused is able to raise a probable defence which creates doubts about the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability, the prose­ cution can fail. The accused can rely on the materials submitted by the Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 9/14 complainant in order to raise such a defence and it is conceivable that in some cases the accused may not need to adduce evidence of his/her own. 16. From the reading of the above said provisions and the judg­ ments the position of law which emerges is that once execution of the promissory note is admitted as has happened in the case in hand, the presumption under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act would arise that it is supported by a consideration. Such a presumption is re­ buttable. The accused can prove the non­existence of a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the accused discharges the initial onus of proof showing that the existence of consideration was improb­ able or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the Complainant who will be obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and upon its failure to prove would disentitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. The burden upon the accused of proving the non­existence of the consideration can be either direct or by bringing on record the preponderance of probabilities by refer­ ence to the circumstances upon which he relies. In case, where the ac­ cused fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non­ existence of the consideration, the complainant would invariably be held entitled to the benefit of presumption arising under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act in his favour. 17. Now coming back to the case in hand, in the instant case it is the case of the complainant that on 01.09.2009 the accused and the complainant has entered into an agreement for sale of the property RZ 50 G. It is further the case of the complainant that he has given Rs. 7 lacs to the accused as an earnest money and out of the said seven lacs the payment of Rs. 3 lacs has been made by him through cheques on 01.09.2009 and on 03.09.2009 for a sum of Rs. 1 lakh and 2 lakh respectively and remaining Rs. 4 lakh was paid by cash. It is further the case of the complainant that thereafter the accused transferred the property RZ 50 G to a third person and to refund the payment made by Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 10/14 him the accused has issued two cheque out of which one cheque was encashed and the second cheque i.e. the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 was dishonored. The accused has denied the claim of the com­ plainant and examined himself as DW­1 and has stated that he has never entered into any agreement with the complainant in respect of the property RZ 50 G. It is also stated by the accused that he has taken loan of Rs. 3 lacs from the complainant through a person named Vijen­ der and he has repaid the same. It is further stated by the accused that one payment of Rs. 1,44,000/­ was made by him to the complainant by way of cash on 28.03.2010 and he has also given two cheques of Rs. 1 lakh each to the complainant dated 29.03.2010 and 18.04.2010 respec­ tively and out of the said two cheques one cheque bearing No. 740140 dated 29.03.2010 was encashed and in respect of the second cheque bearing No 7040140 dated 18.04.2010 the complainant has filed the in­ stant case by misusing the said cheque despite the payment being made by him against the same by way of cash on 18.05.2010. The ac­ cused has also stated that the complainant has also got him to sign on various blank papers and a stamp paper at the time of granting loan. 18. Interestingly perusal of para 2 of the agreement Ex. CW1/1 reveals that the said deal in respect of the property RZ 50 G was to be completed after 10 days of finalization of the case pending in District Courts, Delhi titled as 'Radhey Shyam Vs. Kavita Devi'. Further in cross examination of CW­1 it is stated by CW­1 (Complainant) that he knew that the property RZ 50 G belongs to one Kavita Devi and Vijender. It is further stated by the complainant (CW­1) that he also contacted Kavita Devi and Vijender and they informed him that the accused herein is competent to execute and deal in the property on their be­ half. It is further stated by the complainant that the agreement exe­ cuted by the said Kavita Devi in favour of the accused was also given by the accused to him at the time of the execution of the agreement Ex. CW1/1. Meaning thereby that the complainant was aware that the said property do not belongs to the accused and further from the testi­ Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 11/14 mony of CW­1 it is also apparently clear that the accused herein repre­ sented himself as an ostensible owner of the said property genuine­ ness of which has been ascertained by the complainant. Now coming to the question as to whether the accused was having any relation/deal­ ing with the property RZ 50 G which has been wholly denied by the ac­ cused. It is surprising to note that during cross examination of the ac­ cused as DW­1 the accused has admitted that he has filed an applica­ tion for impleadment in the case titled as 'Radhey Shyam Vs. Kavita' involving the property RZ 50 G . Thereby falsifying his own claim that he has no concern with the property RZ 50 G otherwise, the accused has no occasion to file any application for impleadment in the case pending in respect of the property RZ 50 G. Further during cross ex­ amination of the accused as DW­1 a new story was propounded by the accused that at the instance of Vijender he has filed the said applica­ tion for impleadment in the case in respect of the property RZ 50 G ti­ tled as 'Radhey Shyam Vs. Kavita' and thereafter the said Vijender has helped him in obtaining the loan from the complainant. Surprisingly this fact was never disclosed by the accused in his statement under section 313 of the code or in his examination in chief as DW­1. Now even believing the claim of the accused that he have no dealing in re­ spect of the property RZ 50 G of Kavita and he taken loan from the com­ plainant through Vijender, it is surprising to see that the accused has neither examined the said Kavita or the said Vijender in his defence to corroborate his stand especially when the said Kavita Devi was the owner of the property RZ 50 G and the said Vijender has allegedly helped him procure loan from the complainant. Furthermore, in his evidence as DW­1 the accused has also stated that he made a payment of Rs. 1,44,000/­ to the complainant by cash on 28.03.2010 and further it is also stated by the accused that the last payment of Rs. 1,02,000/­ was made by him by way of cash to the complainant against the cheque in question for the return of the remaining loan on 18.05.2010 in the presence of Sh. Anil Kumar and he has also demanded back his cheque and blank signed papers from the complainant. Surprisingly, Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 12/14 the said Anil Kumar has also not been examined by the accused in his defence in whose presence alleged last payment against the cheque in question was made and the cheque and blank signed papers were de­ manded back by the accused from the complainant. Furthermore, the accused has not placed on record any cash receipt either in respect of the alleged payment made by him to the complainant on 28.03.2010 and on 18.05.2010. Now even believing this theory of the accused that after making the last payment against the loan to the complainant on 18.05.2010 the accused had demanded back his cheque and the blank papers which were not returned by the complainant, it is interesting to see that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 was presented on 13.10.2010 and was dishonored vide returning memo 15.10.2010. It is highly improbable that a debtor who has repaid his entire loan on 18.05.2010 would sit quite for more than a period of four months just waiting for his documents to be misused. This supports the stand of the complainant that he has presented the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 dated 18.04.2014 after waiting for a considerable time at the re­ quest of the accused. Further the complainant to corroborate his stand has also examined Sh. Tejpal as CW­2 and the said witness also stated that the entire transaction between the complainant and the accused in respect of the property RZ 50 G took place in his presence and is also witnessed by him. CW­2 has also tendered in evidence the payment receipt Ex. CW2/1 and Ex. CW2/2 which are part of the agree­ ment Ex. CW1/1 dated 01.09.2009. Furthermore it is admitted by the accused that the agreement Ex. CW1/1 and the receipts Ex. CW2/1 and Ex. CW2/2 also bears his signatures. All the aforesaid circumstances create serious doubts about the claim of the accused and dents his stand and supports the claim of the complainant that the accused dealt with him in respect of the property RZ 50 G and the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 has been issued by him to the complainant for re­ turn of the consideration amount in respect of the property transac­ tion. 19. It is settled that mere denial and putting suggestions to Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 13/14 the witnesses without leading any corroborative evidence in support of the same would not absolve the accused from any liability. It was for the accused to prove by leading cogent evidence as to how and in what manner the cheque in question Ex CW1/2 has come in possession of the complainant. The accused has miserably failed to lead any evidence in this regard and inturn the presumptions U/s 118 (a) and 139 of the NI Act raised against him by the statute stands unrebutted. Further from the evidence on record it also stands proved that the accused has failed to pay the cheque amount within 15 days from the receipt of legal demand notice. Accordingly, In view of the aforesaid discussion, I hereby hold that the complainant has proved and substantiated its allegation against the accused and all the ingredients of the offence under section 138 of the NI Act also stands proved against the accused. Accordingly, accused Virender Singh S/o Late Sh. Tek Chand Solanki, is hereby convicted for the offence U/s 138 of the NI Act. This judgment contains 14 pages. Every Page of this judgment has been signed by me Copy of this judgment be given to the convict free of cost. Announced in the open Court (RAVINDER SINGH ­II) Dated 15.10.2014 MM (NI Act ­07) Dwarka/New Delhi Case No. : 2815/12 Uma Shankar Goel V/s Virender Singh Page No. 14/14
