DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG114

TITLE: Vide This Judgment vs . on 26 March, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/90891026/



DOMAIN: Criminal Law

SUBDOMAIN: Criminal Justice

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, vide, judgment, march, financial, criminal law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI PUNEET PAHWA METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE ­ 01 (N.I. ACT) PATIALA HOUSE COURTS : NEW DELHI Sh. Ramesh S/o Sh. Kishan Lal, R/o 2028­1/E, Pillanji, Kotla Mubarakpur, New Delhi ....................... Complainant Vs. Sh. Mahender Singh @ Mahender Sardar (Senior Clerk, Steno) Block No.3, Punjab Cell, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi. . ................................Accused Case Number. : 267/1 Date of Institution of Present Case. : 31.05.2004 Offence Complained Of. : U/s 138 NI Act Case No. 267/1 Plea of the Accused. : Not Guilty Arguments Heard On. : 07.03.2014. Final Order. : Convicted. Date of Judgment. : 26.03.2014 - :: JUDGMENT :: ­ 1. Vide this judgment, I shall dispose of the present complaint filed by the complainant u/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 (hereinafter referred to as "N.I Act"). 2. Brief facts of the case as alleged by the complainant are that the accused took a personal loan of Rs.6,500/­ from the complainant and the accused issue a cheque bearing no.901583 dated 15.03.2004 drawn on Corporation Bank, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi for a sum of Rs.6,500/­ in discharge of the liability towards the complainant. When the complainant presented the said cheque through his banker, the same was returned back unpaid with the remarks "Payment stopped by drawer". The complaint sent a legal demand notice through his counsel Case No. 267/1 on 19.03.2004 by Regd. Post and UPC. The accused failed to make payment of the cheque amount within 15 days of service of the Notice, therefore, the complainant has filed the present complaint u/s 138 of N.I. Act. 3. The present complaint was filed on 31.05.2004. The accused was summoned on 08.07.2004. The accused entered his first appearance on 03.03.2005. The offence being bailable, the accused was admitted to bail on 05.08.2005. 4. Notice u/s 251 Cr. P.C was served upon the accused on 14.10.2005 to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The complainant evidence was closed on 09.05.2007. 5. Statement of the accused u/s 313 Cr. P.C was recorded on 03.07.2007 and the case was fixed for DE. DE was recorded and the case was fixed for final arguments. Thereafter the accused moved two applications, one u/s 311 Cr. P.C and another u/s 315 Cr. P.C. Both the applications were dismissed and the case was again fixed for final arguments. However, Ld. Revisionist Court had allowed the accused to lead DE and consequently the accused himself and SI Subhash Chander Case No. 267/1 from CBI deposed as defence witnesses. After the examination of these two witnesses, DE was closed and the case was again fixed for final arguments for 06.08.2013. Final arguments were heard as on 07.03.2014 and the case was fixed for orders for today. 6. To prove his case, the complainant himself deposed as CW 1 and supported the facts averred by him in the complaint. In his cross­ examination also he had more or less corroborated the averments made by him in his complaint. In his cross­examination the complainant had submitted that he knew the accused as he used to come with his father Sh. Kishan Lal. He further submitted that he did not know Tejpal Singh nor he was aware that his father knew Tejpal Singh. He had further submitted that he gave the amount to the accused on 15.03.2004 at his residence in the evening when he had come with his father. He further submitted that it was a friendly loan without any interest and at that time the accused handed over a cheque to him. He had denied the suggestion that the amount was given by one Tejpal in December 2002 on an interest of Rs.500/­ per month. He was also not aware that his father manhandled and threatened the accused on 04.03.2004 at CBI office with regard to the amount taken by the accused from Tejpal. He had also denied the Case No. 267/1 suggestion that the cheque in question was taken forcefully and payment of the same was stopped by the accused. He had further denied that the cheque in question was without any legal debt or liability or the same was issued by the accused involuntarily. The complainant has relied upon cheque in question which is Ex. CW 1/A, the cheque return memo Ex. CW 1/B, pay in slip of complainant bank Ex. CW 1/B1, the legal demand notice Ex. CW 1/C, postal receipts and UPC Ex. CW 1/D & Ex. CW 1/E respectively and the complaint Ex. CW 1/F. 7. The accused in his statement u/s 313 Cr. P.C had admitted that he had issued the cheque in question on 04.03.2004. He had also admitted that the notice was served upon him. The basic defence of the accused is that he had taken money from one Tejpal Singh and not from the complainant. He had further submitted in his statement that Kishan Lal was the father of the complainant and he had given him Rs.5000/­ in cash on 04.12.2002 and on 04.03.2004 he had come to his office and manhandled him and got the cheque filled. He had further submitted that as all the persons in the office had gone to attend wedding of daughter of one of the colleagues, not much staff was in the office and finding no other alternative he had to issue the cheque in question to Kishan Lal. Case No. 267/1 The accused has further submitted that in fact Kishan Lal had taken Rs. 5000/­ from him in the year 2003 and he owed nothing from the complainant and the cheque was issued under coercion regarding which he had already lodged a complaint in the office and also with the police and had given instructions to his banker to stop payment. He had further stated that the only dispute was that the complainant was demanding interest @5% per month whereas Tejpal had told him to give two extra installments only. 8. To defend his case the accused had examined two witnesses, himself as DW 1 and Sh. Subhash Chander, SI from CBI, SC­II, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi as DW 2. In his cross­examination, DW 1 i.e. accused himself, had outrightly submitted that he did not know the complainant and he never met with the complainant prior to the institution of the instant complaint. On oath he had submitted that the father of the complainant visited the office of CBI on 04.03.2004 during lunch hours and started quarreling with him. He had further submitted that he had taken a sum of Rs.5,000/­ from Sh. Tejpal on recommendation of Sh. Kishan Lal, father of the complainant and had handed over a cheque of Rs.5,000/­ to Sh. Tejpal. He had further Case No. 267/1 submitted that the said loan was taken from Tejpal and the same was to be repaid in 10 equated monthly installments of Rs.500/­ each and the accused had to pay two additional installments as interest on the said loan. The said cheque was never presented by Tejpal. He had further submitted that the father of the complainant thrashed him by holding from the collar in the office premises and asked him to make the repayment. This as per the accused took place in the presence of 3­4 other staff members. The accused then reported the matter to the SP, CBI. Copy of which was also sent to the Ilaka PS i.e. Lodhi Road. The accused after a few days instructed his bank to stop payment of the said cheque. In the cross examination the accused stuck to the story put forth in his chief examination and there were no major contradictions. 9. Defence exhibited in evidence the enquiry report conducted on the complaint of the accused at his office as Ex. DW1/A. 10. I have heard the arguments advanced by ld. Counsel for complainant and the defence, and have also perused the case file. 11. The five ingredients required for proving an offence under Case No. 267/1 Section 138 of the NI Act are as follows-- i. Drawing of the cheque, ii. Presentation of the cheque with the bank, iii. Returning of the cheque unpaid by the drawee bank, iv. Giving notice in writing to the drawer of the cheque demanding payment of the cheque amount, and v. Failure of the drawer to make payment within 15 days of the receipt of the notice. 12. The defence of the accused is two fold--first that the cheque was taken under coercion by the father of the complainant in the name of the complainant and that there is actually no debt or consideration on which this was done. Secondly that the funds in the account weren't insufficient but that the accused on purpose instructed his bank to stop the payment as the cheque was issued under force and coercion. 13. In regards the essential ingredients mentioned above and the first defence put forth by the accused, the accused admits to have drawn a Case No. 267/1 cheque however he disputes the date as per his statement under Section 313, CrPC. Advancement of loan through the father of the complaint, Shri Kishan Lal has not been called in question. 14. At this juncture it is also pertinent to note that Section 118(a) of the Negotiable Instruments Act, raises the presumption that that every negotiable instrument is made or drawn for consideration. By virtue of this clause, the Court is obliged to presume that the promissory note was made for consideration or until the contrary is proved. In Mallavarapu Kasivisweswara Rao v. Thadikonda Ramulu Firm and Others, AIR 2008 SC 2898, it was held as under-- "...The bare denial of the passing of the consideration apparently does not appear to be any defence. Something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the benefit of shifting the onus of proving to the plaintiff. To disprove the presumption, defendant has to bring on record such facts and circumstances upon consideration of which the court may either believe that the Case No. 267/1 consideration did not exist or its non­existence was so probable that a prudent man would, under the circumstances of the case, shall act upon the plea that it did not exist..." 15. This is further strengthened by the presumption under Section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act that it "shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved that the holder of a cheque received the cheque for discharge in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability." Under this Section, there is a legal presumption that the cheque was issued for discharging a liability and that presumption can be rebutted only by the person who drew the cheque. This presumption can be rebutted by the accused by adducing evidence. So the burden of proof is on the accused. 16. In Hiten P. Dalal v. Bratindranath Banerjee, AIR 2010 SC 1898, it was held as under-- "The words 'unless the contrary is proved' which Case No. 267/1 occur in this provision (Section 139) make it clear that the presumption has to be rebutted by 'proof' and not by a bare explanation which is merely plausible. A fact is said to be proved when its existence is directly established or when upon the material before it the Court finds its existence to be so probable that a reasonable man would act on the supposition that it exists. Unless, therefore, the explanation is supported by proof, the presumption created by the provision cannot be said to be rebutted......" 17. Moreover the accused has not called in question the execution of the cheque. It is on record and has been proved sufficiently by the complainant that the said cheque was presented and was returned unpaid by the drawee bank as per the return memo on record which is Ex. CW1/B with the reason endorsed as the transaction having been stopped by the drawer. Further the stage of giving notice in writing to drawer/ accused (Ex. CW1/C) and demanding payment of the cheque amount is not under dispute. This factum is further not denied by the accused and is so admitted in his statement u/s 313, CrPC. Case No. 267/1 18. In view of the presumptions raised against the accused u/s 118 and 139 of N.I. Act and the other evidence made out, the duty was upon the accused to show that the offence u/s 138 of N.I. Act was not made out against him. So far as the ingredients of Section 138 of N.I. Act are concerned, the issuance of cheque by the accused and return of the same dishonoured has been sufficiently proved. 19. In regards the second contention, Hon'ble Supreme Court in MMTC Ltd. v. M/s Medchal Chemicals & Pharma P. Ltd., AIR 2002 SC 182, has held that though on the ground of "stop payment", provisions of Section 138 are attracted but the accused if he proves that there were sufficient funds in his account and stops payment instructions were given not due to insufficiency or paucity of funds but due to some other reason including absence of debt or liability, then no offence shall be made out against the accused. 20. In the instant matter, the accused alleges that Shri Kishan Lal came to his office on 04.03.2004. Shri Kishan Lal manhandled and humiliated him there. It was thus under fear and coercion that he was Case No. 267/1 made to sign and give the cheque in question to Shri Kishan Lal. The accused states that an enquiry by his office was conducted in this regard. The enquiry officer has placed the enquiry report on record marked as Ex. DW1/A. This report however doesn't lend much support to the version of the accused. It states that though Kishan Lal was seen with the accused on 04.03.2004 however no altercation was witnessed by the people present. Instead the report corroborates to some extent the case of the complainant that the accused had indeed borrowed a sum of Rs. 5,000 from the complainant who was believed to be the son of Tejpal and he owed the complainant Rs. 6,500. 21. Moreover neither has the accused brought on record either his account statement or anything else to substantiate that sufficient amount was present in his account. Nor has the accused examined Tejpal Singh to further clarify his stance. There is thus no basis on which to believe that the funds weren't insufficient and this ground is thus not proved. 22. On the date of the final order the accused filed written arguments wherein the accused has raised further grounds which are Case No. 267/1 discussed below. 23. First three contentions--that there was no liability; allegations in the complaint are vague and bland and that the cheque has been admitted to be without liability. These contention have no basis as the onus was on the accused to dispute it and he has failed to do so in his defence. It is actually the contentions of the accused which seems to be vague and made without proof. 24. Secondly, the defence has stated that the documents such as the cheque, return memo, legal notice have not been exhibited properly, is not made out as these documents have been proved as per the procedure. They have been duly exhibited and proved by the complainant and the accused has failed to disprove these documents. 25. Thirdly, in regards to the issue raised that the return memo bears no date and that as per the date of the legal notice mentioned in the complaint, the affidavit is premature and complaint is time barred, hence the complaint is liable to be dismissed. It is pertinent to note that though the return memo doesn't carry a date, however the paying slip Ex. Case No. 267/1 CW1/B1 indicates the date of 05.04.2004 which implies that the cheque would have been presented by the complainant to the bank on 05.04.2004. Thus the return memo has to be one of a date subsequent to that date. The legal notice is dated 19.04.2004. Therefore the complaint is neither premature nor time barred. 26. Fourthly, a contention is raised that filing of two affidavits is barred by law, this contention of the accused holds no water as there is no such bar in law. 27. Fifthly, Contention has been put forth that no witness was examined as regards the date of returning memo. This contention was never raised before and if the same was to be fabricated the onus was on the defence to bring evidence to prove it. 28. Sixthly, a further argument raised is that the Complaint regarding this cheque (dated 15.03.2004) was already lodged on 04.03.2004. As per the record the only thing which could be said to be have done on 04.03.2004 is that the complainant's father and the accused Case No. 267/1 has met each other that day and that the accused had given a cheque to the complainant's father. The accused has failed to prove that the cheque given bore a date or not or whether the cheque in question is false and fabricated. In the absence of which the cheque as it is, is taken to be proved. 29. The last three contentions as to there being no specific nature of the loan finding mention in the complaint; why the loan is alleged to be without interest if it is actually a loan and that complainant and accused were never known to each other holds no legal ground and has no impact on the decision of the case. 30. The grounds raised by the learned counsel for the accused are not being supported by any evidence or material they are just barred averments and it appears that the accused is just trying to defeat the case of the complainant on frivolous grounds and most of the arguments raised have already been dealt with herein above. As there are presumptions against the accused it was the accused who had to show that the cheque was issued without any debt or liability. Case No. 267/1 FINAL ORDER. 31. In the end it can be said that the complainant has proved beyond all reasonable doubts the guilt of the accused whereas the accused has failed to rebut the presumptions raised against him under Section 118 & 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act and Section 27 of General Clauses Act. Accordingly, the accused is convicted under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act. Announced in the open Court on 26th March, 2014 (PUNEET PAHWA) MM (NI ACT­1) PATIALA HOUSE COURTS NEW DELHI Case No. 267/1 IN THE COURT OF SHRI PUNEET PAHWA METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE ­ 01 (N.I. ACT) PATIALA HOUSE COURTS : NEW DELHI Sh. Ramesh S/o Sh. Kishan Lal, R/o 2028­1/E, Pillanji, Kotla Mubarakpur, New Delhi ....................... Complainant Vs. Sh. Mahender Singh @ Mahender Sardar (Senior Clerk, Steno) Block No.3, Punjab Cell, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi. . ................................Accused ORDER ON SENTENCE Present: Ld. Counsel for complainant. Ld. Counsel for convict alongwith convict in person. Case No. 267/1 Arguments on sentence heard. Ld. Counsel for Complainant has argued that the complainant and the convict were familiar to each other and had cordial relations and the convict taking benefit of such cordial relations, has breached the trust of the complainant. He further argued that the present complaint was filed in the year 2004 and without having any defence the convict has tried to drag the matter and therefore a strict view be taken against the convict so that right example is set and right message should go to the society. On the other hand, Ld. Counsel for the convict has submitted that the convict has neither tried to delay the matter and he was always ready to compound the present complainant with the complainant but the complainant was adamant to harass the convict. He has further submitted that the convict is a govt employee and in case he is sentenced to imprisonment it may effect service and therefore a lenient view may kindly be taken against the convict. Heard. Since the offences u/s 138 NI Act are on the rise and to maintain the sanctity of the negotiable instruments, the legislature has even provided for imprisonment in case of offence u/s 138 NI Act. Case No. 267/1 Perusal of the file shows that the present complaint was filed in the month of May, 2005 and since then the convict has been regularly appearing in this court, therefore, delay in trial can not be solely attributed to the convict. Therefore, this court is of the view that imprisonment shall not be apt punishment in the present case. However, the convict is sentenced to pay a fine of Rs.13,000/­ (Rs. Thirteen Thousand Only) i.e. the double cheque amount as compensation to the complainant to be paid within 7 days from today and in case of default in payment of compensation to the complainant, the convict shall be liable to undergo Simple Imprisonment for 10 days. Copy of order on sentence be given to the convict free of cost. File be consigned to record room after due compliance. Announced in the open Court on 2nd April, 2014 (PUNEET PAHWA) MM (N.I ACT­1) PATIALA HOUSE COURTS NEW DELHI Case No. 267/1
