DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG146

TITLE: Ifsl vs . R.S. Perfumers on 19 December, 2013

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/129470874/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, ifsl, perfumers, december, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI AMIT ARORA: METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE:SPECIAL COURT­13, DWARKA COURTS : NEW DELHI. C.C NO. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers 1. Complaint Case No. : 17068/09 2. Name of the complainant : Indiabulls Financial Services Ltd. (Through its Authorized Representative) Registered Office At: F­60, Second Floor, Malhotra Building, Connaught Place, New Delhi­110001 3. Name of the accused and his : 1. R.S. Perfumers parentage and residence Through its Proprietor 475, 3rd Floor, Haiderkuli Chandni Chowk, New Delhi­110006 2. Suman Kishore C­61467, Yamuna Vihar New Delhi­110053 4. Offence complained of or proved : U/s 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 5. Plea of the accused : Pleaded not guilty 6. Final Order : Convicted Page No. 1 of 17 CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers 7. Date of Order : 19.12.2013 8. Order reserved on : 06.12.2013 BRIEF REASONS FOR THE DECISION: 1. This is a complaint u/s 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act 1881filed by Indiabulls Financial Services Ltd., a non banking finance company which is engaged in the business of financing loans to its customers. The present complaint has been filed through Shri Arun Kumar who is stated to be the authorized representative of the complainant and is authorized to file the complaint. 2. The complainant has arrayed two accused. First accused is shown as the firm i.e. M/s. R.S. Perfumers and the second accused is shown as Suman Kishore who is stated to be Proprietor of M/s. R.S. Perfumers. It is stated that the accused M/s. R.S. Perfumers through its proprietor Suman Kishore had approached the complainant for a business loan for his firm and the complainant accordingly sanctioned a loan of Rs.22,00,000/­ to the firm M/s. R.S. Perfumers through its proprietor, Suman Kishore, under loan account No. LIFSBDL00026282. Towards the payment of monthly installment, the accused being proprietor had issued a cheque bearing No. 105524 dated 15.10.2009 drawn on Punjab National Bank, Chandni Chowk, Delhi­110006 in favour of the complainant. The said cheque was presented by the complainant for encashment, however the same was returned unpaid by the banker of the accused vide memo dated 21.10.2009 due to the reason 'Account closed'. Subsequently, a legal demand notice dated 04.11.2009, through speed post and courier, was issued by the complainant to the accused, intimating him regarding the dishonor of cheque and demanding the payment of the cheque. It is further averred that despite the service of the aforesaid legal notice, the Page No. 2 of 17 CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers accused had failed to make the payment to the complainant. Thus, the complainant has preferred this complaint seeking prosecution of the accused for the offence u/s 138 of NI Act. It is well settled that a sole proprietorship firm has no separate and distinct entity and it is the proprietor who is responsible for all the actions of the proprietorship firm. In law the proprietor and the proprietorship firm are one and same. Thus, in the present case there is no need to pass any specific order against the firm M/s. R.S. Perfumers as it is a sole proprietorship firm. Accused No. 2 Suman Kishore who is the proprietor of the firm is responsible for all its action and hereinafter the term accused shall imply Suman Kishore. 3. After recording pre summoning evidence of the AR, the accused was summoned to face trial by the Ld. Predecessor. The accused appeared before the court to answer the accusation and a notice u/s 251 CrPC was framed against the accused to which he pleaded 'not guilty and claimed trial'. The defence taken was that the cheque in question Ex.CW1/C was given in blank at the time of availing loan as a security cheque. He claimed that he had only signed the cheque and given it in blank and the details on the cheque were not filled by him. The receipt of legal notice Ex.CW1/E dated 04.11.2009 was also denied. 4. After the framing of notice the accused had opted to cross examine the complainant witness by moving an application u/s 145(2) NI Act. Another application u/s 91 CrPC was also moved by the accused seeking the production of statement of account and the loan agreement. The applications were allowed and CW1 was recalled for his cross examination. COMPLAINANT EVIDENCE 5. CW1 Arun Kumar (AR of the complainant) was cross examined by the Ld. Page No. 3 of 17 CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers Counsel for accused. CW1 Arun Kumar in his post summoning evidence has relied upon his earlier affidavit i.e. Ex.CW1/H (which was tendered at the pre summoning stage). The witness in his affidavit had deposed in terms of the complaint and had also proved the following documents to support the case of the complainant. The Power of Attorney was proved as Ex.CW1/A, the certificate of incorporation of the complainant company was proved as Ex.CW1/B, the cheque was exhibited as CW1/C, memo return as Ex.CW1/D, the legal notice as Ex.CW1/E, the postal receipts (speed post receipt and the courier receipt) as Ex.CW1/F and Ex.CW1/F1, the copy of statement of the account was marked as mark X. CW1 was cross examined by the Ld. Counsel for accused and various suggestion were put to him i.e. the address of the accused was incorrect. CW1 has denied that the address of the accused company was incorrect. He was further questioned about the loan agreement. The witness had produced the loan agreement and the same was proved as Ex.CW1/I. CW1 had denied the suggestion that the legal notice was sent at the wrong address of the accused. The cross examination of CW1 suggest that the defence was unable to elicit anything beneficial to the defence of the accused. Nor anything which can be said as adverse to complainant case could be elicited from him. STATEMENT OF ACCUSED 6. After the completion of complainant evidence, statement of the accused was recorded u/s 313 CrPC wherein he was explained the entire incriminating evidence and was questioned regarding the same. The accused had reiterated the plea that the cheque in question Ex.CW1/3 was given to the complainant company in blank for security and it was only bearing his signature and he denied to have filled up the other details on the cheque. He admitted that he had closed his bank account on 18.07.2009 on the ground that his cheque book Page No. 4 of 17 CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers was stolen when a theft had taken place in his factory. He denied the receipt of the legal notice. He has further stated in his answer that he had filed an insolvency petition in the court. DEFENCE EVIDENCE 7. The accused in his defence has examined two witnesses . DW1 was the Manager of the Punjab National Bank i.e. the banker of the accused. He had produced the statement of account of M/s. R.S. Perfumers for the period 12.12.2005 to 18.07.2009 which was Ex.DW1/A. The account was closed on 18.07.2009. DW1 had deposed that the cheques bearing No. 105522 to 105536 were not shown as debited in the statement of the account as they were presented after the closure of the account. It is pertinent to note here the cheque number which is subject matter of present case i.e. cheque No. 105524 (Ex.CW1/C) to appreciate the true perspective of the defence raised by accused. DW1 further deposed that the cheques prior to cheque serial No. 105522 and the cheques onwards serial No. 105537 were debited and reflected in the statement of the account. He further deposed that the cheque book containing the cheque leaf starting from serial No. 105501 to 105600 was issued on 23.10.2007. The purpose behind examining DW1 was to show that the cheque in question was given to the complainant in the year 2007 i.e. much before the date it bears. The accused has tried to show that the cheque book of which the present cheque Ex.CW1/3 forms part, was issued to him in the year 2007 and as he has used the other cheques of the same cheque book in the year 2007, therefore it can be concluded that the present cheque must also have been used by him during the same period i.e. in the year 2007. 8. The accused also entered the witness box as defence witness i.e. DW2. His primary defence was that he has not received the legal notice Ex.CW1/F, as the same was not bearing his correct address which is C­6/467, Yamuna Vihar, Page No. 5 of 17 CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers Delhi­110053. To prove his correct address he had filed his voter I.D. card as Ex.DW2/A wherein his address is mentioned as C­6/467, Yamuna Vihar. He further deposed that the notice Ex.CW1/F had mentioned his address as C­61467, Yamuna Vihar, Delhi­110053. He further deposed that the cheque Ex.CW1/C was a security cheque which he had given to the complainant in the year 2007 at the time of availing loan. He further deposed that in the year 2009 he was using the cheque book of different series/numbers. He stated that he had issued a cheque No. 274448 to the complainant in the sum of Rs. 81,521/­ towards the rejection of ECS dated 12.03.2009 and thus he was using a different cheque book. He further deposed that an insolvency petition marked as mark F was filed by him and the complainant has misused his cheques without his consent. At the defence stage accused has come up with an entirely new plea as he deposed that he had paid almost the entire amount to the complainant i.e. Rs.16,00,000/­ was paid by cheque and Rs.6,00,000/­ was paid by cash and the receipts were stolen on 02.07.2009 when a theft took place in his factory. He further deposed that a theft had taken place in his factory at Kotdawar, Uttrakhand and all his documents were stolen and the photocopy of the certified copy of the FIR bearing No. 93/2009 P.S. Kotdawar was marked as mark A. He denied his liability towards the complainant. The accused was also cross examined by the Ld. Counsel for the complainant and the same is dealt in the latter part of this judgment. No other witness was examined by the accused and thus, defence evidence was closed. 9. Upon completion of DE, matter was taken up for final arguments. Ld. Counsel for both the sides were heard at length. It is the respective version of the Ld. Counsel for the parties that they have been able to successfully prove/defend their respective cases. 10. In brief the primary contentions raised by the Ld. Counsel for the complainant are as under: Page No. 6 of 17 CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers A. He has argued that there is no defence available with the accused and the defence taken by the accused i.e. the cheque was a security cheque is flimsy in nature and is not supported by any credible evidence. B. It is further stated that the defence of the accused i.e. he has repaid the entire loan amount is also false and is not borne out of the overall facts and circumstances proved on record. It was argued that this defence is completely contrary to the admitted insolvency petition filed by the accused wherein he has acknowledged his liability towards the complainant. C. It is argued that the complainant has been able to discharge the initial burden and therefore the presumptions u/s 118 and 139 comes into operation and the burden to rebut the presumption was upon the accused, which he had failed to discharge. It is submitted that the complainant has been able to satisfy all the ingredients of the offence u/s 138 NI Act, in as much as, the issuance of cheque has been proved, signature of the accused on the cheque is also proved, the existing liability also stands proved, legal demand notice was issued at two different address and its service has been proved beyond any doubt and the accused has been unable to dispel the presumption viz­a­viz service of notice. D. Ld. Counsel for complainant had subitted that the notice Ex.CW1/E was issued at two different addresses of the accused and so far as the notice at the first address is concerned i.e. 475, 3rd Floor, Haider Kuli, Chandni Chowk, Delhi­110006, the same stands proved as the notice was dispatched through speed post and through courier at the correct address of the accused as provided by him at the time of availing loan. It was contended that the presumption u/s 27 of General Clauses Act comes into play and the notice can be deemed to be served. It is stated that the accused has not led any evidence to show that he was not residing/available/working at the given address at that Page No. 7 of 17 CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers relevant time and the defence that the said address was left by the accused is an after thought. E. Ld. Counsel for the complainant has placed reliance on the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in CC Alavi Haji Vs. Palapetty Muhammed & Another (2007) 6 SCC 555. It is contended by the Ld. Counsel that in para 17 of the aforesaid decision, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that "the requirement of notice is a clear departure from the rule of criminal law. Any drawer who claims that he did not receive the notice sent by post, can within 15 days of receipt of summons from the court in respect of the complaint u/s 138 of the Act, make payment of the cheque amount and submit to the court that he had made payment within 15 days of receipt of summons and therefore, the complaint is liable to be rejected. A person who does not pays within 15 days of the receipt of summons from the court, cannot obviously contend that there was no proper service of notice as required under Section 38, by ignoring statutory presumption to the contrary u/s 27 of General Clauses Act and Section 114 of Evidence Act. In our view, any other interpretation would defeat the very object of the legislature". 11. On the other hand, Ld. Counsel for the accused has argued to the contrary and the primary defence raised are as follows: A. It was argued that the accused has been able to prove by preponderance of probability that he has a good defence in the present matter. It is contended that the cheque in question was dated 15.10.2009 as claimed by the complainant, however, as per the admitted position, the accused had filed a insolvency petition dated 03.09.2009 wherein, the complainant is one of the respondents. It is stated that the accused (i.e. petitioner) has filed an accompanying affidavit before the insolvency court that he is not having any <span class="hidden_text" id="span_1"> Page No. 8 of 17</span> CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers assets/cash worth more than Rs.500/­. It is thus stated that there was no question nor was any reason for the accused to have issued the present cheque to the complainant after the filing of the insolvency petition. B. Secondly, it is claimed that the notice in the present case was also not served upon the accused as the address mentioned in the notice by the complainant was incorrect address and therefore the complainant is not entitled to take the benefit of the presumption. C. Ld. Counsel for the accused has placed reliance upon a decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of M.D. Thomas Vs. P.S. Jaleel & Another (2009) 14 SCC 398. In the aforesaid case the notice of demand was served upon the wife of the accused and when the issue was raised before the Hon'ble Supreme Court as to whether, there was sufficient compliance with the requirement of giving of notice of demand. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the notice of demand was served upon the wife of the accused and not on the accused and therefore, there is no escape from the conclusion that the complainant had not complied with the requirement of notice. The Hon'ble Supreme Court therefore set aside the order of the conviction. D. Thirdly, it is argued that the complainant witness was also not aware regarding the facts of this case and therefore his testimony is cannot be believed or relied. It is stated that the AR was unable to answer certain questions like who has filled up the cheque etc. E. It is next argued that the cheque in question has been misused by the complainant and the same was given in blank form to the complainant for the purpose of security at the time of availing loan. Ld. Counsel has drawn the attention of the court towards the impugned cheque Ex.CW1/C and argues that the bare perusal of the cheque shows that there is difference in the <span class="hidden_text" id="span_2"> Page No. 9 of 17</span> CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers handwriting and ink used in writing the signature and the rest of the contents of the cheque. 12. I have considered the contention urged on behalf of the parties keeping in view the material on record. Before dealing with the rival contention, it will be pertinent to take note of the cross­examination of the accused as he has examined himself defence witness i.e. DW2. In his cross examination, he had denied having received the legal notice Ex.CW1/F. He had answered that the address mentioned at serial No. 1 in the notice is 475, 3rd Floor, Haider Kuli, Chandni Chowk, New Delhi­110006 was left by him in March 2009. He admitted that he had not filed any documentary evidence or any proof to show that the aforesaid address was left by him in March 2009. He was also confronted with the second address at serial No. 2 in the legal notice i.e. C­61467, Yamuna Vihar, Delhi, however, he denied that his address was C­61467, Yamuna Vihar. He stated that his correct address was C­6/467, Yamuna Vihar, Delhi. He stated that he could not say that there was the typographical error in the address mentioned in the legal notice. He denied the suggestion that even after receiving summons, he had not made the payment of the cheque amount to the complainant. He volunteered that the payment was made even prior to filing of this case. Further cross examination of the witness is quoted here for ready reference. " The firm R.S. Perfumer is a proprietorship firm and I am its proprietor. I had taken a loan of Rs.22,00,000/­. I cannot recall the date on which the loan was taken. I cannot say whether I had taken the loan on 30.11.2007. Volunteered I had lost the record on 02.07.2009. It is correct that there was a monthly installment of Rs.81,021/­ payable by ECS. That after any ECS was dishonored, then in that case I used to pay by cash and only on one occasion I had paid the complainant the ECS amount by way of cheque which was duly cleared". <span class="hidden_text" id="span_3"> Page No. 10 of 17</span> CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers In his further cross examination he was again confronted with the statement of account mark X and was questioned whether he had paid the payment by way of cheques bearing No. 612606 and 274448 which are at point A and B of Page No. 17 of mark X. He answered that since he has lost his record, he cannot say and if there is any payment made by him by cheque, the same must be true. However, he had stated that the aforesaid cheques were of different series than the cheque in the present case. Thus, the Counsel for the complainant has been able to establish from the cross examination of the accused that in case where the ECS had remained unpaid, it was usual for the accused to make the payment by the cheque. Accused in his cross examination has admitted that he has not produced any document in support of the payments claimed to have been made by him to the complainant. He further admitted that in the FIR, the specific number of the present cheque is not mentioned. 13. Thus, from the aforesaid cross examination, it stands proved beyond any doubt that the accused has taken a loan of Rs.22,00,000/­ from the complainant and the repayment was to be made by way of EMI of Rs.81,021/­. It has been further proved that the accused had also paid by cheques when the ECS got unpaid/dishonored/rejected. Two instances where cheque were issued in repayment of ECS, by the accused is also not disputed. It has been also proved that the address stated at serial No. 1 of the demand notice Ex.CW1/E i.e. 475, 3rd Floor, Haider Kuli, Chandni Chowk, New Delhi­110006 was the correct address of the accused. Though the accused has claimed that he has left the address in March 2009, however, he has admitted that he had not filed any documentary evidence in support thereof. Thus, the defence of having left the aforesaid address is only based on bald statement of the accused. The same is also corroborated by the loan agreement Ex.CW1/I which records the same. He has not issued any correspondence to any public authority or to the <span class="hidden_text" id="span_4"> Page No. 11 of 17</span> CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers complainant company in this regard. 14. This is sufficient to dispel the defence of the accused that he has not received the legal notice. Accused has miserably failed to bring on record sufficient facts to show that the defence was bona fide. As a matter of abundant caution the complainant has issued the demand notice Ex.CW1/E at two different addresses of the accused. So far as the first address is concerned, the accused has nowhere deposed in his entire evidence that the said address was not correct address or he was not available at the said address. In his entire examination in chief there is not even a whisper of the same. It was only in his cross examination when he was confronted by the Counsel for the complainant, he for the first time took the plea that he had left the said address in March 2009. This plea for the first time was raised in cross examination. The accused even admitted that he had not filed any documentary proof or evidence to show that he has left the house in March 2009. Had the aforesaid defence of the accused of his having left the address was true, nothing prevented him from proving the fact by leading cogent evidence. In case the accused was occupying the premises as a owner he could have produced the transferred deed/lease deed to show that he has disposed off the said property. In case he was holding the premises as a tenant, he could have produced a vacation certificate from the owner. Except a bald statement there is no cogent evidence led by the accused to prove the fact that he has left the given premises. 15. At the same time perusal of the loan application form/personal detail form shows that the loan was availed in the name of the firm M/s. R.S. Perfumers and the address provided was 435, 3rd Floor, Haider Kuli, Chandni Chowk, Delhi. The accused Suman Kishore who is the sole proprietor of the aforesaid firm has provided his residential address of C­61467, Yamuna Vihar, Delhi­110053. Thus, the complainant had properly dispatched the notice at <span class="hidden_text" id="span_5"> Page No. 12 of 17</span> CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers the first address of the accused. No doubt the accused has been able to show that the second address of Yamuna Vihar was incorrectly mentioned in the legal notice, however, the notice has been also issued to him on the first address which was the address of the proprietorship firm, of which the accused was a proprietor. Service of a notice even if it is at one address is sufficient compliance with the requirement of service of notice. It will be highly profitable to reproduce the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of CC Alavi Haji Vs. Palapetty Muhammed & Another (2007) 6 SCC 555 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court had observed; that Section 27 of General Clauses Act give rise to a presumption that the service of notice has been effected when it is sent to the correct address by registered post. It was further held that unless and until the contrary is proved by the addressee, service of the notice is deemed to have been effected at the time at which the letter would have been delivered in the ordinary course of business. The court further ruled that any drawer who claims that he did not receive the notice sent by post, can within 15 days of receipt of summons from the court, make payment of the cheque amount and informed the court about such payment and request for rejection of the complaint. It was further held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that if giving of notice in the context of Clause B of the proviso was the same as the receipt of notice, a trickster cheque drawer would get the premium to avoid receiving the notice by adopting different strategies and escape from legal consequences of Section 138 NI Act. Reliance can also be placed upon the decision of K. Bhaskaran Vs. Sankaran V. Balan 1999 CRLJ 4606. The aforesaid decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court is a decision of three judges and it is binding upon all the courts in the territory of India. The decision clearly lays down the guiding principles with respect to the issue of the service of notice, which is a mandatory requirement before a prosecution can be launched against the accused. On the other hand, the Ld. Counsel for the accused has placed reliance upon the decision of the Hon'ble <span class="hidden_text" id="span_6"> Page No. 13 of 17</span> CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers Apex Court in 'M.D. Thomas Vs. P.S. Jaleel (supra)'. The said judgment deals with the specific facts of that particular case which has arisen before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. 16. Thus, in view of the aforesaid discussion, the service of notice stands proved on the accused. Accused has been unable to prove that the notice was not received by him as he was unavailable at the first address i.e. at 475, 3rd Floor, Haider Kuli, Chandni Chowk, Delhi­110006. There is no suggestion ever given to the witness that the accused was not running his business from the given address. 17. The second defence raised by the accused was that he had issued the cheque in blank form for the purpose of security and it was given at the time of availing loan. Since there is a presumption in favour of the payee/holder of the cheque u/s 139 of NI Act that unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque, of the nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability." Similarly Section 118 of the Act lays down the presumption that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration. Therefore, the onus was upon the accused to have discharge the burden by preponderance of probability. In the case of "Rangappa v. Sri Mohan 2010 STPL(DC) 952 SC, Hon'ble S.C. has observed in para 14 that: It is a settled position that when an accused has to rebut the presumption under Section 139, the standard of proof for doing so is that of' preponderance of probabilities'. Therefore, if the accused is able to raise a probable defence which creates doubts about the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution can fail. A landmark decision of Hon'ble SC in the case of "Hiten P. Dalal Vs. Bratindranath Banerjee (2001) 6 SCC 16 which lays down an important test of Burden of Proof and the presumption. The Hon'be Supreme Court had observed "Both section 138 <span class="hidden_text" id="span_7"> Page No. 14 of 17</span> CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers and 139 requires that the court "shall" presume the liability of the drawer of the cheques for the amount for which the cheques are drawn. The presumptions are obligatory in nature where the factual basis for raising the presumptions has been established. The court had further held that "the accused is not required to discharge the presumption by the standard of "proof beyond reasonable doubt". rather by reasonable probability I i.e, preponderance of probabilities. It was further held "That such evidence must be produced before the court in support of the defence that the court must either believe the defence to exist or consider is existence to be reasonable probable." 18. Keeping in view the aforesaid legal settled position there is no escape from the conclusion that the accused has miserably failed to prove that he had issued the cheque for security purpose or that he has discharged/repaid the entire loan. This defence was only taken to wriggle out from the liability. Same is completely inconsistent with the admitted position as in his examination in chief the accused has relied upon the insolvency petition which he has preferred and is marked as mark F. In the said petition the accused has himself admitted his liability towards the complainant which itself shows that the defence was absolutely false and frivolous. 19. The next defence of the accused i.e. the cheques were blank signed cheques and the rest of the contents were filled up by the complainant, is also devoid of merit. This defence has been rejected by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the case of 'Jammu and Kashmir Bank Vs. Abhishek Mittal 2012 (1) DCR 189' wherein it was held that there is no law that a person drawing a cheque has to necessarily filled up the same in his own handwriting. The court had held that the plea taken by the accused that the blank cheques were given by him was of no consequence as the accused had admitted his signature. Once he <span class="hidden_text" id="span_8"> Page No. 15 of 17</span> CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers has admitted his signature on the cheque, he cannot escape his liability on the ground that the same has not been filled in by him. When a blank cheque is signed and handed over, it means that the person signing it has given implied authority to the holder of the cheque, to fill up the blank which he has left. A person issuing a blank cheque is supposed to understand the consequences of doing so. He cannot escape his liability only on the ground that the blank cheques had been issued by him. 20. Similarly in Ravi Chopra Vs. State of Delhi 2008 (2) JCC (NI) 169, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court while rejecting a similar contention has observed that under the scheme of NI Act, it is possible for the drawer of a cheque to give a blank cheque signed by him to the payee and consent either impliedly or expressly to the said cheque being filled up at a subsequent point of time and presented for payment by the drawee. There is no provision in the Act which defines the difference in the handwriting or the ink...................... constituting as material alteration for the purpose of Section 87. Thus, it was observed that filling up of the particulars or any difference in handwriting in the cheque does not make the instrument void u/s 87 of NI Act. Thus, the contention raised by Ld. Defence Counsel is without any force and is devoid of merit. 21. The complainant on the other hand has been successful in proving its case beyond any shadow of doubt against the accused and all the defences raised by the accused are without any merit or substance. The contention of the accused that in the year 2009 he was using a different cheque book and in the year 2007 he has used the cheque book of which the present cheque forms part does not leads to any conclusion that a person cannot use more than one cheque book at any particular point of time. In the present scenario it is not uncommon for a person to have with him different cheque books of a <span class="hidden_text" id="span_9"> Page No. 16 of 17</span> CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers particular account. There is no bar in using the cheques of the previous years cheque book. A cheque book which was issued to a customer in the year 2007 can obviously be used in the succeeding years. At the same time the counterfoil of the cheque books which the accused has placed on record in his evidence are only photocopy and they hardly can be taken as a conclusive piece of evidence. 22. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the complainant has been successful in proving its case against the accused beyond reasonable doubts and accused has failed to prove his defence rather his defence appears to be a false and baseless and appear to have been taken just for the purpose of delaying the fate of this case. Accordingly, the accused Mr. Suman Kishore is convicted for the offence under Section 138 NI Act. Let he be heard on the point of sentence. Copy of this order be also given to him free of cost. Announced in the Open Court (AMIT ARORA) on 19.12.2013 METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE DWARKA COURT:NEW DELHI <span class="hidden_text" id="span_10"> Page No. 17 of 17</span> CC No. 17068/09 IFSL Vs. R.S. Perfumers
