DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG128

TITLE: Titled As C.C. Alavi Haji vs . Palapetty Muhammed And Another ... on 24 January, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/138871444/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, titled, alavi, haji, palapetty, muhammed, january, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SH. VISHAL PAHUJA MM NI ACT-02 (WEST), DELHI CC No.2219/1 Tubes Sales Pvt. Ltd. Through its SPA Ravinder Rana, Having office at 2880, Bazar Sirki Walan Hauz Qazi, Delhi. Delhi- 110009. ......Complainant Versus M/s. Aggarwal Sales Corporation Through its partner Rajesh Aggarwal and Anr. Having office at Neel Kanth Market, Hauz Qazi, Delhi. .........Accused Date of Institution : 07.06.2004 Offence complained of : U/s 138 N.I. Act. Date on which the order was reserved : 13.01.2014 Date of Decision : 23.01.2014 Final Order : Convicted/Held guilty CC No.2219/1 1/ 15 Judgment: Vide this judgment, I shall dispose of the present complaint filed u/s 138 N.I. Act. Before going further, it is necessary to dwell upon the brief facts of the case. Brief Facts: 1. The present complaint has been filed by the complainant company through its Special Power of Attorney Sh. Ravinder Rana vide resolution dated 15.04.2004 Ex.CW1/1 and special power of attorney Ex. CW-1/2. It is alleged the complainant company is the authorised dealer of Jindal Pipes Limited and accused is one of the old customer of the complainant. Allegedly the running account of accused is maintained in the books of account by the complainant. It is further alleged that accused placed an order for supplying of goods to Oswal Sugar Limited Hoshiarpur, Punjab and Venus Sugar Limited Moradabad, U.P to the complainant on behalf accused and it was agreed that the payment on account of the goods supplied will be made by the accused. The same were supplied on the instance of the complainant from Jindal Pipes Ltd. to the abovesaid firms on behalf of the accused. 2. Allegedly, in discharge of his liability accused issued three cheques, one bearing no. 347672 dated 31.10.2003 amounting Rs.50,000/-, Cheque bearing no. 048484 dated 18.03.2004 amounting Rs. 481784, Cheque bearing no. 347673 dated 18.03.2004 amounting Rs. 1,44,131/-. Same are Ex.CW1/4 to Ex.CW1/6. It is further alleged that on presentation of the said cheques by the complainant with its banker, the same returned back unpaid CC No.2219/1 2/ 15 with the remarks "Funds Insufficient" vide returning memo dated 30.04.2004. Same are Ex.CW1/7 to Ex.CW1/9. Thereafter, the complainant issued a Legal Demand Notice dated 19.05.2004 Ex.CW1/10 vide registered AD as well as courier to the accused demanding the cheques amount. However, the accused failed to make the payment within the statutory period after receiving the legal demand notice. Hence, present complaint is filed. 3. Complainant filed its pre-summoning evidence. Considering the same, prima facie offence u/s 138 NI Act was made out. Consequently, the accused were summoned u/s 138 NI Act. On his appearance, the accused was granted bail on furnishing bail bonds and thereafter, the notice u/s 251 Cr.P.C stating substance of accusation was served upon the accused persons jointly on 04.09.2006 to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Complainant Evidence: 4. Complainant stepped into the witness box through its SPA Sh. Ravinder Rana as CW1 who tendered his evidence by way of an affidavit Ex.CW1/A. In his affidavit complainant has reiterated the same facts as that mentioned in his complaint. The complainant examined witness Yogender Pal Singh as CW2. The witness deposed in his examination in chief that he has been working as commission agent of steel at Chawri Bazaar for about 15 years. Witness further deposed that he has acquaintance with both the parties to the present case and is aware about the transactions taken place between them as he was the broker of the same. Witness further deposed that the transaction took place between the said two firms in July, 2003 and thereafter in October, CC No.2219/1 3/ 15 2003. Witness further deposed that he placed an order to Tube Sales Private Limited for the supply of Steel Tubes to Oswal Sugar Mills, Mukeria, Punjab and Venus Sugar Mills Moradabad, U.P on asking of Aggarwal Sales Corporation. Witness further deposed the goods were duly supplied by Jindal Pipes on the instance of Tube Sales Limited and the payment against the same was made by Aggarwal Sales Corporation through cheques that were handed over in the office of Tube Sales by Rajesh Aggarwal on behalf of the above said firms i.e. Oswal Sugar Mill and Venus Sugar Mill. Witness further deposed that the cheques given by the Rajesh Aggarwal were dishonoured and the said fact came to his knowledge through Tube Sales Ltd. in the year 2003. Complainant also examined the witness from Registrar of Companies as CW3 Mr. R.K. Saini. The witness is a formal witness who brought the record and depose that Tube Sales Private Limited is duly incorporated company. Same was Ex.CW3/A. Another witness Sh. Sanjeev Singhal was examined a CW4. The witness deposed in his examination in chief that he was authorised to depose on behalf of Jindal Pipes Limited vide authority letter Ex.CW4/A. The witness brought the record containing the payment receipt record, payment transfer record, transfer account / credit note and copy of customer ledger of Oswal Sugar Limited, Statement of account of Tubes Sales Private Limited. Same are exhibited as Ex.CW4/1 to Ex.CW4/5. Witness brought the photocopy of the invoices qua the goods supplied. Same is Ex.CW4/6 to Ex.CW4/8. Witness further brought the record qua the payment receipt and statement of account of Venus Sugar Limited. Same is Ex.CW4/9 and Ex.CW4/10 however witness further deposed that he does not have any personal knowledge about the facts of the case and was deposing as per record and CC No.2219/1 4/ 15 he was not making the statement on behalf of any person. Complainant also examined another witness from Indian Sucrose Limited (earlier known as Oswal Sugar Limited) as CW5 Amit Kumar. The witness deposed in his examination in chief that M/s. Oswal Sugar Limited has got new name i.e. Indian Sucrose Limited and he has been authorised to depose before the court vide authority letter Ex.CW5/A. The witness brought the record relating to the transaction involved in the present matter i.e. Bank Statement which shows the transaction dated 03.10.2003 showing payment made to Aggarwal Sales Corporation. Same is Ex.CW5/1. It is further deposed by the witness that order for supplying goods placed by Oswal Sugar Limited to Aggarwal Sales Corporation. Witness further deposed that he is not having personal knowledge about the facts of the present case and is not deposing at the instance of any person. Statement of accused u/s 313 Cr.PC r/w 281 Cr.PC: 5. In his statement accused admitted his signatures on the cheques in question. Accused further stated that the cheques were issued in blank as advance to the complainant against the goods to be supplied however material was not received by the accused so there is no liability qua the cheques in question towards the complainant. Accused further denied receiving of legal demand notice issued by the complainant. Defence Evidence: 6. In order to prove his defence accused stepped into the witness box as DW1 by taking the permission of this court u/s 315 Cr.PC. In his examination CC No.2219/1 5/ 15 in chief accused denied placing of order to the complainant for the supply of goods to Oswal Sugar Limited, Hoshiar Pur and Venus Sugar Limited Moradabad, U.P. and denied receiving of goods on behalf of the same. Accused further deposed that the cheques in question were lying with the complainant in blank except his signatures thereon on account of old dealings with the complainant. Accused further deposed that he has not received any payment from Oswal Sugar Limited, Hoshiar Pur and Venus Sugar Limited Moradabad, U.P. in respect of transaction in question nor he stood as guarantor to the same. Accused denied having any liability towards the complainant and also denied receiving of legal demand notice issued by the complainant. Reasons for Decision: 7. Accused admitted his signatures on the cheques in question and issuance of the same to the complainant, therefore, execution of the cheques stands duly proved. Once, the execution is proved, the presumptions of law u/s 118 and 139 N.I Act comes in favour of the complainant and the initial burden of proof shifts upon the accused. The presumptions of law are rebuttable. Let us see whether the accused has been able to rebut the same by adducing sufficient evidence on record or not. 8. Ld. Counsel for the accused has raised a contention that accused has never been served with the legal demand notice issued by the complainant as the same was not sent on the complete address therefore no cause of action arises. Hence the complaint is liable to be dismissed on this account. On the other hand, Ld. Counsel for the complainant has submitted that CC No.2219/1 6/ 15 accused has admitted in his cross examination that generally the correspondence is received by him at the address given on record. Which means that non mentioning of word "Sirkiwalan" does not create any hurdle for the purposes of correspondence. Hence, plea taken by the accused stands rebutted. Moreover the accused has appeared before this court upon the service of the process issued against the accused at the same address therefore, the presumption u/s 27 of General Clauses Act can be drawn and the legal notice should be deemed to have been served. The admission made by accused in his cross examination that he received the letters at his address generally if the word Sirkiwalan is not mentioned there on the address and admittedly the complainant never filed any complaint in the postal department for non service of any letter which shows that each and every correspondence is being received by the accused at the same address on which legal demand notice have been sent by the complainant to the accused. Moreover, the process issued against the accused by this court has also been served upon the accused on the same address following which the accused has appeared before this court. So, in view of the judgment passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case titled as C.C. Alavi Haji Vs. Palapetty Muhammed and another (2007) 6 SC 555 the presumption can easily be drawn against the accused as the service of the legal notice deemed to have been effected and in view of section 27 of General clauses Act also the presumption can be drawn as the notice have been sent upon the correct address of the accused. Hence, the contention raised by the accused stands rebutted. 9. Ld. Counsel for the accused has raised two main contentions in order to rebut the presumption of law lying in favour of the complainant. The same CC No.2219/1 7/ 15 are dealt below one by one:- Firstly it is the argument of Ld. Counsel for the accused that the AR of the complainant Sh. Ravinder Rana is not the competent person to prosecute the present complaint as he has failed to produce the minute book nor any witness have been examined for proving his authorization. Hence, complaint should be dismissed. On the other hand ld. Counsel for the complainant argued that the board of resolution Ex.CW1/1 and Special Power of Attorney Ex.CW1/2 are already filed on record and have been duly proved by the complainant so there is no question of incompetency of the AR Ravinder Rana for filing and prosecuting the present complaint. Hence, contention raised by the accused is without any substance. It is well established law that only board of resolution / extracts of minutes of meeting is required for showing the authorisation in favour of the authorised representative and for proving the same neither the minutes of board of meeting are required nor the Directors of the company are required for deposing qua the board of resolution unless the authenticity of the same is challenged. Here is this case the accused has neither disputed the board of resolution Ex. CW-1/1 nor the Special Power of Attorney Ex.CW1/2 executed in favour of Mr. Ravinder Rana. Not even a single suggestion disputing the authenticity of document Ex.CW1/1 has been put by the accused to complainant witness Ravinder Rana. Both the documents have been duly proved by the complainant in his evidence. Merely, the non production of minutes book will not cast any doubt upon the document Ex.CW1/1. Moreover the accused did not ask the witness to produce the same. Hence, I do not find any force in the argument put forth by the ld. Counsel for the accused therefore the contention stands rebutted. I would rely upon the CC No.2219/1 8/ 15 judgment passed by Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in CRL.M.C. 3019/2006 & CRL.M.A.No.4950/2006, Ravi Gupta Vs. R.C Tiwari in support of my finding. 10. The other fold of argument made by ld. Counsel for the accused is that there is no document placed on record by the complainant which can show that the transaction between the complainant and the accused have taken place. Neither any purchase order is there nor any proof qua the delivery of the goods have been produced by the complainant. It is further argued that the bills relied upon by the complainant does not carry the name of either party that can show that the goods against which the payment is claimed have been delivered to the accused or on behalf of the accused. Hence, the basis of the complaint is missing and the cheques are left without any consideration, therefore the accused cannot be held liable u/s 138 of NI Act. On the other hand Ld. Counsel for the complainant argued that as a matter of practice followed no written purchase order was ever placed and on the verbal orders the goods were supplied by the complainant to the accused. Admittedly, there had been transaction prior to the present transaction in question when the complainant being the sole distributor of M/s. Jindal pipes supplied goods to the accused on verbal orders without any written purchase order. It is further submitted that as per the agreement accused was supposed to make the payment after receiving the payment from Oswal Sugar Limited and Venus Sugar Ltd. but despite receiving the payment from the said firms / companies accused failed to make the payment to the complainant and the cheques in question issued by him were dishonoured. Receiving of payment by the accused from Oswal Sugar Limited has been proved by witness CW5 Amit Kumar as neither his testimony was rebutted nor document Ex.CW5/1, statement of account CC No.2219/1 9/ 15 showing the payment made by Oswal Sugar Limited to Aggarwal Sales Limited by way of cheques was disputed. Arguing further Ld. Counsel relied upon the testimony of witness CW2 who tend to be a broker between the complainant and the accused qua the present transaction and the testimony of witness CW4 from Jindal Pipes Ltd. whose testimony remained unshaken and supported the version of complainant. It is further argued that the accused has failed to put forth any substantial evidence which can probablise his plea of defence, therefore he is liable to be held guilty u/s 138 of NI Act. Countering the argument of complainant, ld. Counsel for the accused submitted that neither the original invoices nor there carbon copies have been produced by any complainant witness so there photocopies placed on record cannot be ready into evidence. Hence, there is no proof to show that the goods have been supplied by the complainant to the accused. Hence no liability on the part of the accused. 11. While considering the above contention raised by the accused and the argument put forth by the complainant to the said contention few things have been cleared. Firstly, there is no dispute to the fact that complainant and accused had transactions in the past as well apart from the questioned transaction. Secondly, admittedly no written purchase order were placed by the accused to the complainant in respect of previous business transactions and the fact claimed by the complainant that there is no such practice followed by the parties in the said trade is also not disputed by the accused at any point of time. No material contradiction has come out in the testimony of CW2, CW4 and CW5 at the time of their cross examination. Their categorical statements in the examination in chief supported the version of complainant. Moreover the statement of account Ex.CW5/1 and the ledger account CC No.2219/1 10/ 15 Ex.CW4/1 to Ex.CW4/5 were duly proved during the evidence. In fact, the complainant has established his case/claim by leading un-rebutted C.E leaving no stone unturned. On the contrary the testimony of the accused as DW1 has many infirmities and contradictions that wipe out its veracity. Firstly, the accused admitted the maintaining of his books of account whereas he failed to produce a single document qua the same. Secondly, no plausible explanation came from the accused that why the cheques in question were issued by him to the complainant. It is highly improbable to believe that blank signed cheques of accused being a valuable document remained in the possession of the complainant without any purpose and the accused did not take any steps either to prevent the misuse of the same by stopping the payment through his banker or for recovering back his cheques by taking some legal recourse. Accused has been so callous that he does not even remember the time or date when he issued the cheques to the complainant company. As per the admission of the accused himself that he used to receive monthly bank statement from the bank, he could not explain that why he was not aware about the dishonorment of the cheques which seems to be lame excuse. In his cross examination accused admitted having dealing with Oswal Sugar Limited (now known as Indian Sucrose Ltd.) and Venus Sugar Ltd. which further support the version of the complainant that the goods were supplied to both the firms on behalf of the accused. Even the accused could not show any documentary proof to prove his plea of defence that the transactions taken place between him and the above said firms were not the transaction in question that have been alleged in the present complaint. Again, no books of accounts or any other record has been produced by the accused to that effect. CC No.2219/1 11/ 15 12. I agree to the argument put forth by the ld. Counsel for the accused that the invoices / bills placed on record by the complainant are not the original or carbon copies and are only the photocopies of the same, which cannot be read into evidence as not proved in accordance to law but the mere fact that the original invoice not filed on record does not dis-entitle the complainant to establish his case. In the complaint u/s 138 of NI Act the complainant has to establish that the cheques in question have been issued in discharge of legal liability by the accused and if the issuance of cheque is proved the presumption of law u/s 139 comes in favour of the complainant. The initial burden of proof is upon the accused to prove that the same was not issued for any consideration. If in the instant case the invoices / bills are set apart, the testimony of the complainant witnesses are sufficient to prove the case of the complainant beyond reasonable doubt. As per the judgment passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in a case titled as Rangappa Vs. Sri Mohan Criminal Appeal No. 1020 of 2010, the accused is only expected to rebut the presumptions of law on the scale of preponderance of probabilities by adducing sufficient evidence on record. In the present case, no cogent evidence has been adduced by the accused to probabalise his plea of defence. Therefore, no reasonable probable defence has been raised which can compel the court to believe in its existence. The accused has drastically failed to explain his stand of issuance of cheques to the complainant and his failure to get back the same. Hence, the initial burden of proof lying upon the accused remained undischarged. The judgments passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case titled as Krishna Janardhan Bhat vs Dattatraya G. Hedge 2008 [1] JCC [NI] 50 and Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd vs Pennar Peterson Securities Ltd. & Ors. 2000 [2] SCC 745 are not applicable in the present case as the facts and CC No.2219/1 12/ 15 circumstances of the present case are altogether different. It is argued by the ld. Counsel for accused that M/s. Aggarwal Sales Corporation is prop. firm and not partnership firm. No evidence qua the firm being partnership firm has been led by complainant. On the other hand accused categorically stated in his examination in chief that he is the sole proprietor of M/s. Aggarwal Sales Corporation which has not been refuted / disputed by the complainant. Hence, accused no.1 cannot be convicted separately as legal entity. Decision: 13. I have gone through the material placed on record and arguments advanced by Ld. counsels. In view of the above discussion and detailed analysis of the evidence led by the parties, this court is of the view that accused has failed to rebut the presumption of Section 139 N.I. Act and could not raise a reasonable probable defence. 14. All the essential ingredients of offence u/s 138 are made out. As the accused could not discharge the initial burden lying upon him the onus never shifted upon the complainant. Therefore, it can be said that complainant has successfully established his case beyond reasonable doubt. Hence, the accused is found to be guilty and is hereby convicted for the offence under Section 138 N.I. Act. Announced today in the (Vishal Pahuja) open court on 23.01.2014 MM NI ACT (WEST)/DELHI 23.01.2014 CC No.2219/1 13/ 15 IN THE COURT OF SH. VISHAL PAHUJA MM NI ACT-02 (WEST), DELHI CC No.2219/1 Tubes Sales Pvt. Ltd. Through its SPA Ravinder Rana, Having office at 2880, Bazar Sirki Walan Hauz Qazi, Delhi. Delhi- 110009. ......Complainant Versus M/s. Aggarwal Sales Corporation Through its partner Rajesh Aggarwal and Anr. Having office at Neel Kanth Market, Hauz Qazi, Delhi. .........Accused 24.01.2014 Order on Sentence:- Ld. counsel for the accused has submitted that accused is a poor person who have a large family to look after. It is further submitted that the accused is only earning member of his family who has to look after his aged mother and he himself is a Diabetic patient. Considering the above facts and bonafide of the accused, a lenient view may be taken against him. On the other hand ld. counsel for the complainant has argued that the complainant has been running from pillar to post to recover his amount for last 10 years. It is further argued that there had been a CC No.2219/1 14/ 15 commercial transaction and the accused deliberately did not pay the amount against the goods supplied by the complainant. It is further submitted that complainant has spent heavy litigation expenses for pursuing the present complaint, so it is prayed that accused be punished stringently in terms of imprisonment as well as heavy compensation be awarded to the complainant. It is necessary to be mentioned here that the offences u/s 138 of N.I. Act are on high rise and in order to keep the spirit of the legislation, the accused cannot be released on probation as these offences have massive effect on the economic condition of the persons. I have heard the arguments led by both the counsels on behalf of the parties. The cheques in question have been issued on account of commercial transaction and the Negotiable Instrument Act has been enacted to uphold the sanctity of business transactions enabling the payment to be made by way Negotiable Instruments like that of cheques to secure the faith of parties dealing with each other and when the drawer of the cheque could not fulfill his commitment he should be dealt with iron hand. Keeping in view, the points put forth by both the parties and considering the condition of the accused and sufferings of the complainant, I feel the ends of justice will meet if the accused is sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for one year and is ordered to pay the compensation of Rs.10,00,000/- to the complainant within 30 days from today and in case of failure to pay the amount, the accused shall undergo two months simple imprisonment in addition to one year simple imprisonment. Accordingly, sentence stands passed. VISHAL PAHUJA MM NI ACT (WEST),DELHI 24.01.2014 CC No.2219/1 15/ 15
