DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG109

TITLE: M/S Beardsell Limited vs M/S Videocon International ... on 1 July, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/123663792/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, beardsell, limited, videocon, international, july, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI LOKESH KUMAR SHARMA ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE­04, NEW DELHI DISTRICT PATIALA HOUSE COURTS, NEW DELHI Unique I D No. : 02403R0181572013 Criminal Appeal Number : 1/1/14 dated 16.01.2014 CC No. : 1996/1 PS: : Connaught Place U/S: : 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act M/s Beardsell Limited 114/115, Jyotishikhar Building No.8, District Centre, New Delhi­110058 Through its representative .....Appellant versus M/s Videocon International Limited 27, Kasturba Gandhi Marg New Delhi­110001 Through its Authorized Signatory Sh. Yatinder Singh S/o Sh. Rajbir Singh .....Respondent Appeal received by Court : 16.01.14 Arguments concluded : 06.06.14 Date of order : 10.07.14 CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.1/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. JUDGMENT: 1 By way of present appeal, the appellant herein has challenged the impugned judgment of conviction dated 10.10.2013 passed by the court of Sh. Arul Varma, the then learned Metropolitan Magistrate, (NI Act­01), Patiala House Courts, New Delhi whereby the appellant herein was held guilty and convicted for an offence punishable under sections 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act (N.I. Act) and the consequent order on sentence dated 07.11.2013 in CC No. 1996/1 titled as M/s Videocon International Ltd. vs. M/s Beardsell Ltd. & Anr. whereby the learned MM had directed the appellant herein to pay twice of the total amount as mentioned in the cheque in question (i.e. Rs. 60,00,000/­) and had further directed to pay the aforesaid amount as compensation of Rs.60,00,000/­ to the respondent herein within one month from the date of order. 2 Briefly stated the facts that had given rise to the filing of the present criminal appeal are succinctly given as under: That the respondent herein is a company incorporated and registered under the Companies Act, 1956, engaged in the business of manufacturing and trading of electronic goods, had placed an Inter Corporate Deposit (ICD) with the appellant herein on the agreed terms and conditions for the period w.e.f. CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.2/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. 05.06.1993 to 04.06.1994 and the appellant herein had further agreed to repay the same to the respondent herein alongwith an interest @ 24% per annum on the aforesaid ICD for which the appellant herein had promised to issue a cheque at the time of maturity of the said ICD in favour of the respondent herein. As alleged, a cheque bearing no. 0345128 dated 18.01.1996 amounting to Rs. 30,00,000/­ drawn on Bank of India, Janpath, New Delhi was issued by the appellant herein in favour of the respondent herein towards the discharge of its liability in respect of the aforesaid ICD. On presentation, the aforesaid cheque was got dishonoured on 09.07.1996 for the reasons "payment stopped by the drawer". Despite service of legal notice dated 24.07.1996 the appellant herein had failed to make the payment to the respondent herein within the stipulated period in respect of the cheque in question, though the appellant herein had replied the said legal notice vide its reply dated 04.08.1996. Hence, the complaint was filed before the learned trial court. 3 The appellant herein had caused his appearance through its representative before the learned trial court pursuant to the summons issued against it and was admitted to bail. Thereafter, notice of accusation under Section 251 Cr.P.C. was served upon the appellant herein to which he had pleaded not guilty and had claimed trial. Thereafter, the matter was postponed for CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.3/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. evidence. 4 In support of its case, the respondent herein had examined two witnesses namely Sh. Yatinder Singh (CW1) and Sh. Ashok Sawhney (CW2). Both these witnesses were duly cross examined by the appellant herein. Thereafter, the appellant herein was examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C. on 15.04.2010. 5 The appellant herein had also examined eight witnesses in all in his defence. 6 After conclusion of the trial, the learned trial court had held guilty and convicted the appellant herein under Section 138 of N.I. Act and had also passed the consequent order on sentence dated 07.11.2013. 7 The appellant herein had challenged the aforesaid impugned judgment on the following grounds: 8 That the impugned judgment passed by the learned MM is contrary to the law and against the established principles of law laid down by the superior courts and had not appreciated the evidence on record and thus, the impugned judgment was liable to be set aside. 9 That the learned trial court had also failed to appreciate the fact that in the absence of a notice of 72 hours issued by the respondent herein to the appellant herein, the amount under the ICD could not be recalled and the judgment relied upon by the learned MM had no bearing to the facts of the present case and CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.4/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. thus the observations made in the impugned judgment regarding the contention of 72 hours notice, held no water and therefore, the judgment was liable to be set aside. 10 That the learned MM had also failed to observe that to constitute an offence of dishonour of cheque, there must be insufficient fund in the account of the drawer of the cheque, whereas in the present case the payment had been stopped by the drawer and the legal notice as issued by the respondent herein was duly replied by the appellant herein and the same was not taken into consideration by the learned MM while passing the impugned judgment. 11 It was further stated that the Ld. MM appeared to have taken into consideration the document Ex. CW1/DA containing the terms and conditions upon which ICD of Rs. 30,00,000/­ was placed by the respondent with the appellant requiring 72 hours advance notice by the respondent company to the appellant before presentation of cheque and hence it was stated that since the presentation of cheque by the respondent was done without issuance of any such 72 hours prior notice which was clearly in breach of terms and conditions of ICD, hence dishonour thereof would not entail any action under section 138 of NI Act. 12 It had been stated further that judgment cited and relied upon by the Ld. MM in para 30 of the impugned judgment had no bearing upon the facts of the CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.5/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. present case. It merely provided that even if the payee was intimated before hand not to present the cheque for encashment and the bank was also informed not to make the payment against the cheque and if the cheque got dishonoured when payee ignored such an intimation and had presented the cheque, this section 138 NI Act would still be made out. 13 Another ground which had been taken by the appellant is that though the ICD placed on 5.6.1993 was for a maximum period of six months whereas the disputed cheque was dated 18.1.1996, hence it was axiomatic that there was no occasion for the appellant to issue such a cheque and that too after a lapse of two years to the respondent with referance to the said ICD. 14 It had also been reiterated again that the reason for dishonourment of the cheque in the present case was not "insufficiency of funds", rather "stop payment" instructions were issued by the appellant, hence it did not attract the provisions of section 138 NI Act. It had also been contended that the cheque was not issued in discharge of any debt or any other legal liability. However, I am not impressed with this contention as now it is the settled preposition of law that dishonourment of a cheque for any reason whatsoever barring few exceptions shall essentially attract the provisions of section 138 NI Act. 15 Reliance had also been placed on cross­examination of Sh Yatinder Singh (CW1) recorded on 16.9.2009, as a ground of appeal, wherein he had stated CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.6/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. that he was not in a position either to admit or deny as to whether the cheque issued by the accused/appellant to the respondent was not issued towards any debt, rather only as device to fulfill the requirements of the accounts. 16 Another ground which had been taken by the appellant is that section 138 NI Act provided penal provisions and thus punishment in the said offence was provided as imprisonment of either description up to two years or with fine not exceeding double of the cheque amount or both, whereas section 357 Cr.P.C. dealt separately with the powers of the Court to award compensation to the complainant/victim to be paid by the convict out of the fine amount imposed upon him/her and section 357 (3) Cr.P.C. further provided that if the penalty or fine was not a part of sentence, then the Court might have also ordered for compensation to be paid to the complainant/victim. However, the judgment dated 10.10.2013 followed by the order on sentence dated 7.11.2013, had made it manifestly clear that the Ld. MM, without imposing any fine upon the appellant herein had directed the payment of compensation to the respondent which was neither in accordance with the provisions of section 138 NI Act nor within the powers of the Ld. MM to have passed any such order and as such the impugned judgment and consequent order on sentence was liable to be set aside on this ground alone. 17 The other ground which had been raised before this court is that the CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.7/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. appellant/accused with all his bonafides had proved that the photocopies held by the appellant were adequate to draw a presumption that the cheque in question was not given to the respondent towards any debt or liability legally recoverable from the appellant but it was issued in connection with certain adjustments between Videocon Narmada Electronics Ltd and Nava Bharat Ferror Alloyes Ltd (NFAL) in relation to the transactions confined to them. 18 It was also stated that the respondent had fraudulently presented the cheque in question for encashment because as per the contents of the complaint, the ICD had carried interest @ 24% per annum for a period of one year , that is from 5.6.1993 to 4.6.1994 and even if assumed for the sake of arguments that the interest @ 24% per annum was payable by the appellant to the respondent on the date of maturity, then also the amount mentioned in the cheque did not match with the principal amount and interest component computed thereon, hence the Ld. MM ought to have come to the conclusion that cheque in question was not at all issued in relation to discharge of any liability or debt, legally recoverable from the appellant. However, instead of arriving at such a conclusion, the Ld. MM had drawn an adverse inference against the appellant herein. 19 Lastly, it was stated that despite the Ld. MM observing regarding "sufficiency of funds" in the account of the appellant, he had miserably erred CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.8/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. in convicting the appellant for the aforesaid offence under section 138 NI Act without even examining the judgments cited and relied upon by the appellant in its written submissions submitted before the Ld. MM and hence his judgment was based on conjunctures and surmises as the appellant was guilty of misusing the settled principles of law and thus the appeal of the appellant deserved to be admitted on merits and the impugned judgment and consequent order on sentence were liable to be set aside. 20 I have heard the learned counsels appearing for the parties and perused the material available on record. 21 During the course of oral submissions, Sh. Jagdeep Vats and Sh M. Sowaridev, Ld. Counsels appearing on behalf of appellant had also submitted before this court that there was an inordinate delay in the present case as the complaint was filed before the Ld. Trial Court in the year 1996 but the complainant/respondent herein had tendered his affidavit during pre­ summoning evidence in the year 2005 only and thus the said complaint was liable to be dismissed by the Ld. MM on this short ground of delay alone. However, I do not find any merits in the present contention because in case of filing of a criminal complaint before the court of Ld. MM, the point in consideration relates to the delay committed in filing of the complaint itself and not to the date when the pre­summoning evidence by way of an affidavit CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.9/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. was allegedly filed. 22 It was also submitted during the course of submissions that there were four Metropolitan Magistrates who had tried and dealt with the present case which was not in conformity of the latest law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court related to the case of such nature wherein it has been stated that the Ld. MM, who had recorded the evidence shall only dispose of the case and none other then him can pass a final judgment and any judgment if so rendered would be a nullity in the eyes of law. However, since the said judgment has been passed after recording of the evidence in the present case, hence same would be applicable in prospective manner and not in a retrospective manner and thus this contention raised on behalf of the appellant is also devoid of any merits and does not carry any weight in it. 23 Reliance has also been placed on para 30 of the impugned judgment wherein the Ld. MM had dealt with the issue related to the advance notice of 72 hours before presentation of the cheque in question and further reliance was placed on para 32 of the impugned judgment wherein the Ld. MM was pleased to observe as under: " To substantiate this defence, the accused examined eight witnesses. The gist of the testimonies of these witnesses in repect of the terms and conditions of the ICD for Rs. 30 lacs from the complainant (VIL) to the accused ( Beardsell) hinges upon the predication that the ICD was an CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.10/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. interest free deposit given by the complainant to the accused against outstanding of VNEL payable to NBFAL, as an accommodation loan till such amount was eventually settled by VNEL to NBFAL." 24 In the light of the aforesaid observations, it had been tried to be portrayed to this court that it was a finding of the Ld. MM that ICD was an interest free deposit given to the appellant by the respondent against the outstanding of VNEL payable to NBFAL, as an accommodation loan, till such amount was eventually settled by VNEL to NBFAL. 25 However, I have no hesitation in holding that it is a mis­interpretation of the aforesaid para done by the appellant herein because it has been clearly observed by the Ld. MM in the impugned para itself that gist of the testimonies of the said eight witnesses examined by the appellant during its defence evidence was hinging upon the prediction that certain facts had happened and what had been tried to convey to the court by the witnesses cannot be substituted as an observation of the court, hence I do not find any merits in this submissions of the appellant as well. 26 So far as the contention related to the actual date of transaction of ICD and the date of cheque as had been taken as ground no. 8 in the present appeal is concerned, there is sufficient documentary evidence available on record to show that on none of the earlier occasions, the respondent herein had issued CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.11/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. any written instructions or intimation to the present appellant regarding renewal of the cheque and all documents and letters were sufficient enough to prove on record that it was always upon the telephonic instructions received from the respondent herein that the appellant used to replace the cheques drawn in favour of the respondent. Documents Ex. CW1/DB, Ex. CW1/DC and Ex. CW1/DD can be easily referred to in this regard. 27 So far as the contention of the appellant regarding adjustment of account as reflected in the document Ex. CW1/DD is concerned, no document had been placed on record by the appellant to show that this proposal of the appellant herein was ever accepted or acted upon by the respondent herein. 28 Reliance has also been placed by the appellant on the document Ex. CW5/X­6. However, I have no hesitation in holding that the said document itself does not pertain to the present respondent. Rather it pertained to Videocon Narmada Electronics Ltd, which is a separate legal entity in itself and is distinct and different from Videocon International Ltd., who is respondent in the present case. 29 It is well settled preposition of law that each juristic person having been incorporated under any of the Indian laws, enjoys separate independent, individual personality in the eyes of law having its own rights and liabilities whatsoever which are independent of the rights and liability of such other CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.12/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. juristic person. 30 So far as the ground taken in para 10 of the appeal is concerned which is related to the deposition of CW­1 regarding his expression of lack of capability either to admit or deny the suggestion as put to him during his cross­ examination is concerned, mere inability of the witness either to admit or deny the existence of certain facts in itself is not sufficient to disprove the existence or otherwise of the said fact unless some more evidence either to prove its existence or non­existence is brought on record. Hence, even this testimony is also not going to help the appellant in any manner whatsoever. 31 So far as the ground in relation to awarding of the compensation without imposing a fine is concerned, I have no hesitation in holding that the appellant had misread the provision of section 357(3) of Cr.P.C., which is independent of section 357(1) Cr.P.C. It is only when sentence of fine has been imposed upon the accused by the Court, then Court is bound to award compensation not exceeding the amount of such fine under section 357(1) Cr.P.C. However, section 357(3) Cr.P.C. is independent and does not restrict the powers of the Court to award any amount of compensation to the victim irrespective of its restrictive jurisdictional powers to impose fine. Although the Ld. MM had not categorically used the word "sentence of fine" in his order on sentence. However, plain reading of the same as appearing in paras 3 and 4 are CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.13/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. concerned, it becomes crystal clear that the aforesaid amount of Rs.60 lacs was to be realized from the appellant herein as a mode of fine and the entire fine as imposed was thus awarded by the Ld. MM to the respondent herein towards compensation. Hence, it cannot be held that the Ld. MM had committed any illegality or infirmity warranting of any interference of this Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, by awarding such compensation in his order on sentence. 32 So far as the adjustment of the accounts of other two companies as agitated in paras 14 and 15 of the grounds of appeal are concerned, as observed earlier, each and every juristic person itself is an independent personality distinct from other and hence it can never be presumed that liability of one juristic person shall be adjusted by another juristic person against the third person . Therefore, this ground does not holds any substance in it. 33 Ld. Counsel appearing for the respondent Sh. B. S. Nagar, had drawn the attention of this Court to the deposition of DW6 examined by the appellant herein in its defence on 16.2.2012 as well as on 19.4.2012 and had stated that this witness himself had admitted existence of dispute between the parties to the present litigation in respect of non payment of ICD and this witness had further gone to the extent of stating that he had personal knowledge of the fact that the aforesaid ICD was placed with the appellant by the respondent at the CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.14/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. request of the appellant made on its behalf by one Sh. P. Punniah and DW6 himself had taken the decision to place such ICD with the appellant, though relationship between the parties was only in respect of borrowing ICD and nothing beyond that, and thus it has been submitted that in the light of the aforesaid deposition of DW6 the very own witness of the appellant herein himself had deposed against the appellant and he was not even declared hostile by the appellant, hence his testimony can not be brushed aside or ignored at all and has to be essentially read as against the appellant herein as well. 34 After hearing rival contentions of the parties, I have no hesitation in holding that Negotiable Instruments Act is a Special Act constituting an offence punishable under section 138 NI Act, not only on mere dishonourment of the cheque but only upon consequent failure of the drawer to make payment to the drawee within 15 days from the date of receipt of notice. Further, by virtue of certain legal provisions incorporated in the said Act, certain presumptions have also been carved out therein which are in favour of the drawee and against the drawer as provided under sections 118 and 139 of the said Act itself and the onus to rebut these presumptions always rests upon the accused and not upon the complainant. Hence, an exception to the general principles of criminal law regarding presumption of innocence in favour of the accused has been dispensed with in this special legislation and onus rests upon CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.15/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. the accused who is presumed to be guilty to establish his probable defence on record by rebutting those presumptions existing against him. 35 If the legal preposition in this regard is examined in the light of the facts of the present case, then I have no hesitation in holding that even despite examining eight witnesses in its defence, the appellant herein had miserably failed to rebut those presumptions existing against it by adducing any cogent and relevant evidence on record. 36 On the other hand, the respondent had categorically established and proved on record the issuance of cheque by the appellant, its consequent dishonourment on presentation due to "stop payment instructions" issued by the appellant to its banker and failure of the appellant to make payment involved in the aforesaid cheque within the stipulated period despite service of legal notice issued to it by the respondent in this regard. 37 Therefore, the respondent herein had discharged its onus successfully. Hence, I have no hesitation in holding that the judgment passed by the Ld. MM convicting the appellant for an offence punishable under section 138 NI Act, and the consequent order on sentence do not suffer from any illegality or infirmity warranting any interference of this Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction. 38 As a result, the appeal fails and the same is hereby dismissed. CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.16/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd. 39 TCR be sent back with a copy of the judgment. 40 Appeal file be consigned to record room after completion of all other necessary formalities. Announced in the open Court on 10.07.2014 (LOKESH KUMAR SHARMA) ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE­04 NEW DELHI DISTRICT/ PATIALA HOUSE COURTS/NEW DELHI CA No. 1/1/14 Page No.17/17 M/s Beardsell Ltd. vs. M/s Videocon International Ltd.
