DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG093

TITLE: Mr. Prakash Chand Nimboria vs Unknown on 26 May, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/127394436/



DOMAIN: Criminal Law

SUBDOMAIN: Criminal Justice

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, prakash, chand, nimboria, unknown, financial, criminal law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SH. ASHOK KUMAR, MM­07, SOUTH EAST, SAKET COURTS, NEW DELHI CC No. 349/2/14 U/S 138 NI Act MR. PRAKASH CHAND NIMBORIA S/o Sh. Hukam Chand, R/o VPO­ Smalaka, New Delhi. .......................Complainant Versus MR. RAHIMUDDIN Proprietor of R.K. Meet Shop, At RZ­3/23, Shahnagar, Manglapuri, Palam, New Delhi­110045. .............................. Accused Offence Complaint off or proved. : Section 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act. Plea of accused : Pleaded not guilty Date of Institution : 19.02.2003 Date of Reserving order : 02.05.2014 Final order : Convicted Date of pronouncement : 26.05.2014 JUDGMENT FACTS OF THE CASE 1­ The facts of the case as per the complaint and pre­summoning evidence of the complainant filed by way of affidavit which is also adopted as post­summoning <span class="hidden_text" id="span_1">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 1 of 15</span> evidence by the complainant are that the complainant and accused had friendly relations with each other since a long time. The accused took a friendly loan of Rs. 60000/­ from the complainant in the year 2001 for which the accused issued three PDCs as mentioned herein below. Thereafter, the complainant presented the cheques for encashment which became dishonoured on account of "insufficient funds". On the said intimation on returning memo dated 11.01.2003, the complainant served a legal notice dated 18.01.2003 to the accused. TRIAL PROCEEDINGS 2­ Thereafter, the complainant filed the complaint under Sec. 138 NI Act after the accused failed to make the payment within 15 days of the receipt of legal notice. On the said facts, the accused was summoned and notice under Sec. 138 NI Act was framed against the accused to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The complainant adopted the pre­summoning evidence in his post­ summoning evidence also. Thereafter complainant was cross examined. Thereafter, statement of accused under Sec. 313 CrPC was recorded and the accused thereafter examined his father Sh. Khacheru Khan as DW1 and his father's friend as DW2 as defence witnesses. The following documents were relied by the complainant in his evidence : Complainant proved the following documents in his pre­summoning evidence :­ i­ Cheuqes with bank endorsement Ex. CW­1/A, CW1/B and CW1/C. ii­ Bank returning memos Ex. CW1/D, CW1/E and CW1/F. <span class="hidden_text" id="span_2">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 2 of 15</span> ii­ Legal notice dated 18.01.2003 Ex. CW1/G. iv­ Registered AD and UPC Ex. CW­1/H and CW1/I. Accused proved the following document in his defence evidence : i­ Copy of account statement of DW1 Khacheru Khan mark A. 3­ The complainant was duly cross­examined by the counsel for the accused and thereafter the accused was examined under Sec. 313 CrPC. All the evidence appearing against the accused was put to him. The explanation of the accused was that he had asked for the loan from the complainant and on demand of the complainant he gave the advance cheque without taking the loan because the complainant represented that he would extend the loan to the accused in a few days. However, after some days the complainant did a U turn and refused to extend the loan because he had a dispute with father of the accused to whom the complainant had advanced the loan but even after he father returned the loan amount complainant was demanding more money from him. Hence, here the accused admits that three cheques in question were executed by him. Thereafter, the accused led the defence evidence and examined his father Khacheru Khan as DW­1 and also examined one Sh. Kishan Lal his father's friend as DW2 who were cross­examined by the complainant. 4­ RELEVANT LAW 138. Dishonour of of cheque for insufficiency, etc. of funds in the account­ Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, is <span class="hidden_text" id="span_3">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 3 of 15</span> returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provision of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for [ a terms which may be extended to two years], or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both : Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless ­ (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, [within thirty days] of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid' and. (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation - For the purposes of this section, " debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability. 139. Presumption in favour of holder­ It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque, of the nature <span class="hidden_text" id="span_4">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 4 of 15</span> referred to in section 138, for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. Sec. 43 of NI Act interalia provides that a negotiable instrument drawn, accepted, etc. without consideration or for a consideration which fails creates no obligation of payment between the parties to the transaction. The ingredients to prove the commission of offence under Sec. 138 NI Act have been laid down in Jugesh Sehgal Vs. Shamsher Singh Gogi 2009 (9) SCALE 455. The relevant portion of the said judgment reads as under: "9. It is manifest that to constitute an offence under Section 138 of the Act, the following ingredients are required to be fulfilled: (i) a person must have drawn a cheque on an account maintained by him in a bank for payment of a certain amount of money to another person from out of that account; (ii) The cheque should have been issued for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability; (iii) that cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity whichever is earlier; (iv) that cheque is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of the account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with the bank; <span class="hidden_text" id="span_5">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 5 of 15</span> (v) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within 15 days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; (vi) the drawer of such cheque fails to make payment of the said amount of money to the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque within 15 days of the receipt ofar the said notice" On burden of proof in cases under NI Act From reading of below quoted paragraphs No. 4 to 9 and 20 of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Vijay Vs Laxman 2013 (1) RCR Cr 1028, the following legal ratio emerges with regard to burden of proof in matters under NI Act. i. The prosecution has to prove beyond reasonable doubt that cheque was issued by the accused duly signed by him but this burden is lightened by presumption under Sec. 118 and 139 NI Act. Hence, the complainant has only to make an averment that cheque was issued by accused to complainant for lawful consideration. ii. Thereafter, the burden shifts on the accused to show that the cheque was not issued in lieu of legally enforceable debt or liability but was issued by way of security or any other reason on account of some business transaction or was obtained unlawfully. iii. However, accused can rebut this presumption or discharge his burden by showing a probable defence or preponderance of probability raising genuine doubt <span class="hidden_text" id="span_6">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 6 of 15</span> that no legally enforceable debt or liability exists. iv. Accused can discharge this burden either from circumstances appearing in the case or the evidence adduced by the complainant or accused in his defence. v. On reading of definition of word proved or disproved in Sec. 3 of Evidence Act with Sec. 139 NI Act court shall presume a negotiable instrument to be for consideration unless and until after considering the matter before it, it either believes that the consideration does not exist or considers the non­existence of the consideration so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that the consideration does not exist. Above said law is quoted in paragraphs No. 4 to 9 and 20 of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Vijay Vs Laxman and another 2013 (1) RCR Cr 1028. Above said observations were also made by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kamala S Vs Vidhyadharan MJ 2007 (3) RCR (Cr) 865 and M/s. Kumar Exports Vs M/s Sharma Carpets 2008 (16) SCALE 372 Paras 9 to 12. On service of legal notice in cases under NI Act In this respect it has been provided in the case titled as C.C. Alavi Haji Vs Palapetty Muhammed and Anothers (2007) 6 SCC 555 that the entire purpose of service of legal notice to the accused under Sec. 138 NI Act is to give an opportunity to the drawer to pay the cheque amount within 15 days of the service of legal notice and thereby free himself from the penal consequences. It conceives cases where a well­intentioned drawer may not have made necessary arrangements for reasons beyond his control to honour the cheque drawn by him and hence this <span class="hidden_text" id="span_7">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 7 of 15</span> opportunity has been provided. Hence, this provision is meant to protect honest drawers whose cheque may have been dishonoured for the fault of others or who may have genuinely wanted to fulfill their promise but on account of inadvertence or negligence failed to make necessary arrangements for the payment of the cheque. Hence, any honest drawer who claims that he did not receive the notice sent by post, can, within 15 days of receipt of summons from the court in respect of the complaint under Sec. 138 NI Act, make payment of the cheuqe amount and submit to the court that he has made payment within 15 days of receipt of summons (by receiving a copy of the plaint with the summons) and, therefore, the complaint is liable to be rejected. Where a legal notice is sent under registered cover with proper address and stamp and sent along with the summons and complaint, then if it is contended that legal notice was not received only with a view to cheat the complainant, and such offer of payment was not made within 15 days of receipt of summons, then such dishonest drawer can not contend improper service of the notice by virtue of applicability of presumption under Sec. 27 GC Act and 114 Evidence Act. Hence, the accused by a preponderance of probability has to prove the following : 1­ That the cheque was issued as security or for any business transaction and there is no legally enforceable debt or liability because the said security is no more enforceable or the debt or liability has been paid. 2­ That the cheque was taken unlawfully and wrongfully. 3­ That the debt or liability does not remain legally enforceable due to <span class="hidden_text" id="span_8">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 8 of 15</span> any other reason. In the present case defence of the accused is that there is no legally enforceable debt against the cheques given by the accused to the complainant no loan was extended as per their implied contract. 5­ ARGUMENTS HEARD AND DEALT WITH I have heard the submissions of both the Ld. Counsel for the complainant as well as the accused. Ld. Counsel for the accused has also filed written submissions and the same have also been considered besides the said submissions and the record. 6­ Let us now examine whether the complainant has proved the necessary ingredients of the offence under Section 138 of the Act or not. 6.1 The first ingredient of the offence stands proved as original cheques are placed on record as Ex. CW1/A, CW1/B and CW1/C and issuance of same is admitted by the accused. The accused during the cross examination of the complainant, his own explanation u/s 313 Cr.P.C and defence evidence led by him proceeds on the ground that he has signed the cheques and it is settled law that a signed cheque by the account holder is a complete instrument and the rest of the portions of the cheque can be filled by the complainant. Only defence of the accused is that though he gave cheques in question to the complainant but in return loan was not extended by the complainant and hence he does not owe any liability. Hence it is clear that that the accused has signed the cheque in question. 6.2 The second ingredient of the offence is that the cheque must have been issued in discharge of legal liability. As the signatures on the cheques are admitted, <span class="hidden_text" id="span_9">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 9 of 15</span> the presumptions raised under Section 139 of the Act become applicable and the issuance of cheque in discharge of the legal liability stands proved. The law on this point has been succinctly laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Rangappa v. Sri Mohan AIR 2010 SC 1898. In view of the aforesaid law, the presumption under Sec. 139 NI Act works in favour of the complainant once he files the necessary documents like the dishonored cheques, returning memo, legal notice and delivery proof and avers that the cheques were issued for legally enforceable debt or liability which the accused has failed to pay despite expiry of 15 days of the delivery of legal notice. In the present case the only defence raised by the Ld. Defence Counsel is that the father of the accused and the complainant were working in the same organization namely CPWD and they know each other for about 30 years. Infact father of the accused namely DW1 Khacheru Khan had taken the money in the amount of Rs. 60000/­ for which DW1 has already repaid in the amount of Rs. 70000/­ but the complainant was demanding Rs. 80000/­. The said DW1 has also filed copy of the account statement Mark A showing that said amount has been returned on 14.01.2002 but despite that the case has been filed against the accused who had given the advance cheque but due to the dispute with father of accused loan was not granted to the accused. Hence, the said cheques being without consideration the defence of the accused is not liable to be upheld on this ground. Even otherwise the said statement is only a copy and it has not been duly certified by the bank as per law and hence, same also has not been exhibited. In view of the said reasons the said account statement cannot be considered. The accused has not <span class="hidden_text" id="span_10">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 10 of 15</span> been able to bring any other documentary evidence in support in his defence evidence to show that he has not taken the loan from the complainant. Further in the cross examination of the complainant the accused could not bring any contradiction which may dislodge the presumption in favour of the complainant which is raised u/s 139 of N.I. Act that the cheque was issued by the accused for a legal consideration. The complainant consistently denies the suggestion; that there was no legal consideration; that no legal notice was served; that he took the cheques in question in advance and misused them; that Khacheru Khan has returned the amount of Rs. 70000/­ for cheques in question; that there was dispute with DW1 regarding the loan given to him; that at the time of giving loan to the accused DW1 or DW2 were present there or that the complainant misused those cheques in any manner. Further, as per the account statement mark A the loan was returned in 14.01.2002 but it is very strange as to why the complainant would write the date of September, 2002, November, 2002 and December, 2002 on those cheques if the accused had given these cheques as advance during the time when the complainant had a dispute with DW1. This is against the natural course of conduct. It is also pertinent to note that DW2 friend of DW1 says that the loan was given to the accused at complainant shop at Kapsehra in his examination in chief but in cross examination he denies that the complainant has a shop at that place. The case of the accused proceeds on the basis that the loan was given at the shop of the complainant. Hence on one hand the accused has not been able to show that he did not take any loan from the complainant or that he repaid the amount and on the other hand the presumption in favour of the complainant that <span class="hidden_text" id="span_11">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 11 of 15</span> the cheques were issued by the accused to him for a legal consideration stands unrebutted. Hence, I give the finding in favour of the complainant that he received the cheques from the accused for a valid consideration. 6.3 The third ingredient of the offence is that cheque must be presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date mentioned on it. The cheques are Ex. CW1/A, CW1/B and CW1/C were returned back unpaid on 11.01.2003 and the cheques are dated 5.9.2002, 5.11.2002 and 5.12.2002. So it is evident that it was presented for payment within the statutory period of six months. 6.4 The fourth ingredient of the offence is that the cheque(s) must be returned unpaid. The cheque were returned unpaid for the reason "Insufficient funds". The original bank return­memos Ex CW1/D to Ex. CW1/E placed on record proves dishonour of cheques by virtue of presumption raised under Section 146 of the Act and during the trial, Ex. CW1/D to CW1/E went uncontroverted. 6.5 The fifth ingredient of the offence is that the demand notice must be issued to the accused within 30 days of the intimation of dishonour of cheque and same be served upon the accused. Accused has denied the receipt of legal notice Ex. CW1/G. The address mentioned in the pre & post summoning affidavit (both are same) and in the complaint on the basis of which summons were issued to the accused and he had appeared is not disputed by the accused. In view of Judgment of CC. Alavi Haji (Supra) this point can not be raised any more by the accused. If the accused had not received the legal notice, then he could have offered the payment within 15 days from the receipt of the summons in view of my aforesaid findings in the second ingredient that cheque was issued in discharge of legal <span class="hidden_text" id="span_12">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 12 of 15</span> liability. 6.6 The last ingredient is that the accused must not have made the payment of the cheque amount within fifteen days of the receipt of legal notice. During the evidence, the accused has clearly admitted that because he does not owe anything to the complainant hence he did not make the payment of cheque amount. DECISION 7. In view of the aforesaid the accused is convicted for the offence under Sec. 138 NI Act and he be separately heard on the point of sentence. Announced in the open (ASHOK KUMAR) Court on 26.05.2014 MM­07, SOUTH EAST, SAKET COURTS, NEW DELHI <span class="hidden_text" id="span_13">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 13 of 15</span> IN THE COURT OF SH. ASHOK KUMAR, MM­07, SOUTH EAST, SAKET COURTS, NEW DELHI Prakash Chand Nimboria Vs. Rahimuddin. CC No. 349/2/14 U/s 138 NI Act 26.05.2014 ORDER ON POINT OF SENTENCE Present : Complainant in person with Counsel Sh. D.K. Agarwal. Accused in person with proxy counsel Ms. Rita Satija. Vide separate judgement, the accused is convicted for commission of offence under Sec. 138 NI Act for non­payment of three cheques amounting to Rs. 60000/­ in total vide separate judgement of even date. It is stated by the convict that he is managing a Dhaba which is owned by the joint family. The convict has a family consisting of 6 children, all unmarried and minor. It is stated that a lenient view may be taken against the convict while imposing the sentence and convict be not sentenced to imprisonment. In view of the fact that the matter is pending since year 2003 and is more than 10 years old and keeping in view the fact that the cases under Sec. 138 NI Act are unduly clogging the dockets of the courts leading to docket explosion and extraction of judicial time which could have been given to other cases and on the other hand due to the dishonest issuance of cheque, the same is eroding of credibility of such instruments, this court does not deem it necessary to extend the <span class="hidden_text" id="span_14">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 14 of 15</span> benefit of Probation of Offender Act to the accused. Such dishonest conduct leads not only to docket explosion which needs to be tackled with a heavy hand but also has resulted in harassment of the complainant holding up the valuable money belonging to him. In view of the aforesaid, the convict is directed to suffer simple imprisonment of 2 years and fine of Rs. 1.20 lakhs all of which is directed to be paid as compensation to the complainant and in absence of payment of the same, the convict shall suffer simple imprisonment for 6 months. Copy of judgement and order on sentence be given to the convict. Announced in the open (ASHOK KUMAR) Court on 26.05.2014 MM­07, SOUTH EAST, SAKET COURTS, NEW DELHI <span class="hidden_text" id="span_15">CC No. 349/2/14 Page 15 of 15</span>
