DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG092

TITLE: Indiabulls Financial Services ... vs . on 27 May, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/20323225/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, indiabulls, services, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SH. RAVINDER SINGH­II, METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE (NI) ACT - 07 DWARKA COURTS, NEW DELHI. Case No. : 4750/14 Unique Case ID No: 02405R0132702012 INDIABULLS FINANCIAL SERVICES LTD. Through its Authorized Representative Having Registered Office At: F­60 Second Floor, Malhotra Building, Connaught Place, New Delhi. .............COMPLAINANT Vs. SUBE SINGH R/o D­1/481, Sultanpuri Geeta Senior Secondary School Delhi ­ 110041 Also at: MCD, Circle No 35, Avatika Rohini Sector­1 Water Tank, MCD Flut New Delhi .....................ACCUSED Date of Institution: 03.07.2012 Plea of the accused: Pleaded Not Guilty Date of Reserving Judgment: 19/04/2014 Date of Judgment: 27/05/2014 Sentence/final Order: Acquitted JUDGMENT 1. By way of present judgment I shall decide the present complaint case under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 (as amended up to date, herein after said as NI Act) filed by the complainant Indiabulls through its authorized representative against the accused Sube Singh S/o Sh. Fateh Singh. CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page1 /11 FACTS OF THE PRESENT COMPLAINT CASE 2. The factual matrix as per the allegations in the complaint which are necessary for disposal of the present case are that, the accused approached the complainant and requested for personal loan. It is alleged that the complainant sanctioned and disbursed a loan of Rs. 35412/­ to the complainant under the scheme of personal loan vide loan account no. S000012754. It is further alleged that the accused promised to make timely and regular payment of the scheduled EMI's but miserably failed to make the regular payment of EMI's in terms of the loan agreement. 3. It is further alleged that the accused in order to discharge his legal liability has issued a cheque bearing No.85472 dated 16.05.2012 amounting to Rs. 37,604/ drawn on State Bank of India in favour of the complainant. It is further alleged that the complainant on the basis of assurance and instructions of the accused presented the said cheque for encashment however the same was dishonored vide cheque returning memo dated 22.05.2012 with the remarks "Drawer's Signature Differs". The complainant thereafter has given a legal notice of demand dated 30.05.2012 to the accused which was sent to the accused through courier on 02.06.2012 thereby calling upon the accused to make the payment of the cheque amount within 15 days of the receipt of the legal demand notice. It is alleged that the accused has failed to pay any sum in response to the legal demand notice as a result of which the complainant has filed the present complaint for prosecution of the accused U/s 138 of the NI Act. 4. After complaint was filed, Sh Mahesh Kumar Authorized representative of the complainant (herein after said as AR) lead his pre summoning evidence by way of an affidavit and after hearing the Ld. Counsel for the complainant and considering the entire material and documents on record, summons were issued against the accused by the Court vide order dated 08.08.2012 for the offence U/s 138 of the NI Act. On appearance of the accused a separate notice U/s 251 Criminal Procedure Code (herein after said the Code) dated 21.06.2013 was given to the accused CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page2 /11 to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Thereafter, an opportunity to file an application U/s 145 (2) of NI Act was given to the accused. Thereafter the accused moved an application U/s 145 (2) of NI Act and the same was allowed and the case was listed for cross examination of the complainant witnesses. COMPLAINANT'S EVIDENCE 5. Sh. Mahesh Kumar AR for the complainant got himself examined as CW­1 and adopted his evidence affidavit Ex. CW1/J. CW­1 also relied upon documents Ex. CW1/A to Ex. CW1/I. Ex. CW1/A is the copy of the amalgamation certificate of the complainant company, Ex. CW1/B is the copy of certificate of incorporation of the complainant company, Ex. CW1/C is the power of attorney in favour of the AR (CW­1). Ex. CW1/D is the original cheque in question. Ex. CW1/E is the Cheque returning memo. Ex. CW1/F is the legal notice of demand dated 30.05.2012. Ex. CW1/G and Ex. CW1/H are the courier receipts along with the delivery report vide which the aforesaid demand notice was sent to the accused and Ex. CW1/I is the complaint under disposal. 6. CW­1 also tendered statement of account of the accused as Ex. CW1/X and copy of the resolution in favour of Vipin Saroha as Ex. CW1/Y. CW­1 (AR) was cross examined by the Ld. Counsel for the accused. Thereafter, the complainant's evidence was closed at request of the AR of the complainant. STATEMENT OF THE ACCUSED UNDER SECTION 313 OF THE CODE 7. After Complainant's evidence the statement of accused was recorded U/s 313 of the Code in which all the incriminating evidence along with exhibited documents were put to the accused Sube Singh. The accused admitted that he has taken loan from the complainant but further stated that he has repaid the entire loan to the complainant. The accused further submitted that the cheque in question does not bear his signature and the CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page3 /11 particulars on the same have also not been filled by him. It was further submitted by the accused that the blank cheque in question was given by him to the complainant as a security at the time of taking loan from the complainant. The accused further denied the receipt of the legal demand notice. The accused further stated that the statement of account filed by the complainant is also false. The accused also stated that he has not issued the cheque in question in discharge of his liability. The accused further stated that he owes no liability towards the complainant as he has repaid the entire loan to the complainant. The accused further stated that the complainant has filed the false complaint case by misusing his security cheque. The accused all together denied all his liability. DEFENCE EVIDENCE 8. Thereafter, the case was fixed for defence evidence. An application U/s 315 of the Code was moved by the accused for examining himself as a defence witness. The said application was allowed and accused examined himself as DW­1. DW­1 was cross examined by the Ld. Counsel for the complainant and thereafter, defence evidence was closed at request of the accused and the case was fixed for final arguments. FINAL ARGUMENTS 9. Final arguments were addressed on behalf of both the parties. I have heard the Ld. Counsels for both the parties and have given my anxious and thoughtful consideration to submissions made, further I have perused the entire record of the case file and the evidence on record. Before proceeding further it is imperative for me to go through the relevant provisions of law "138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account:­ Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page4 /11 or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless ­ (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation:­For the purpose of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability. APPRECIATION OF EVIDENCE IN THE LIGHT OF INGREDIENTS OF THE OFFENCE U/S 138 OF THE NI ACT (I) ISSUANCE OF CHEQUE IN QUESTION, ITS PRESENTATION AND DISHONOUR 10. It is not disputed by the accused that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/D is drawn on the account maintained by him. Further signature on the cheque in question has also not been disputed by the accused. The accused has himself admitted to have signed and issued the cheque in question to the complainant while answering to the question at the time of framing of notice U/s 251 of the Code and also during his examination in chief as DW­1 but it was also stated by the accused that he has given the blank signed cheque in question to the complainant at the time of taking of the loan. However the accused throughout the trial also stated that he has not filled all the particulars in the Cheque in question. During the course of CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page5 /11 arguments Ld. Counsel for the accused also submitted that the complainant has taken security cheque from the accused at the time of granting loan and except signature other particulars in the cheque in question Ex.CW1/D has not been filled by the accused. It is trite to say that by putting the name and date there is no material alteration on the cheque U/s 87 of the NI Act. There is no rule of banking business that the name of the payee as well as the amount should be written by the drawer himself as no law provides that in case of cheque the entire body has to be written by the drawer only. Therefore, once the signature on the cheque in question is admitted as has happened in the instant case the plea that particulars in the cheque in question has not been filled by the drawer is of no consequence unless some cogent evidence has been lead by the accused that he has not expressly or impliedly authorized the payee to fill the particulars therein which is totally absenting in the instant case. Therefore, In light of the evidence on record and my discussion above, it stands proved that the cheque in question Ex CW1/D bears the signature of the accused and the same has been issued by the accused from his own account. 11. Further record reveals that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/D dated 16.05.2012 was got dishonored vide cheque returning memo dated 22.05.2012 which is Ex. CW1/E. The presentation, dishonor of the cheque in question and the cheque returning memo has also not been challenged by the accused. Therefore, considering the entire evidence on record it stands duly proved that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/D was dishonored vide cheque returning memos Ex. CW1/E with the reason "Drawer Signature Differs". (II) SERVICE OF THE LEGAL NOTICE OF DEMAND UPON ACCUSED 12. In the instant case, AR for the complainant (CW­1) Sh .Mahesh Kumar, has specifically stated in his evidence affidavit that he has got issued the legal notice of demand dated 30.05.2012 which is Ex. CW1/F to the accused and it was sent to the accused on 02.06.2012 vide courier receipts of which are Ex. CW1/G and Ex. CW1/H. The courier tracking report is also CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page6 /11 exhibited along with the courier receipts. 13. The accused at the time of framing notice under section 251 of the code stated that he has received one paper but he cannot say whether that was legal demand notice CW1/F. Further the accused during his statement under section 313 of the code and also during his evidence as DW­1 has denied the receipt of legal demand notice CW1/F. Interestingly, the accused has himself admitted during his cross examination as DW­1 that he resides at the D1/481, Sultanpuri, Near Geeta Senior Secondary School, Delhi 110041 which is one of the addresses mentioned in the legal demand notice and the complaint which establishes that the legal demand notice CW1/F was sent to the accused at the correct address. Moreover, the summons were served upon the accused at the aforesaid address and the accused has put his appearance in compliance thereof. Further it is well settled principle of law that where the accused raises a defence that he has not received the Legal demand notice, but has received copy of the complaint with the summons as has happened in the instant case, then he can within 15 days of the receipt of summons make payment of the cheque amount and he then cannot contend that there was no proper service of the legal demand notice (See C.C. Alavi Hazi Vs. Palapetty Mohd. & Anr. (2007) 6 Supreme Court case 555). Therefore. I hold that the legal notice of demand Ex. CW1/F was duly served upon the accused. (III) ISSUANCE OF THE CHEQUE IN QUESTION IN DISCHARGE OF LEGAL DEBT OR LIABILITY. 14. The crux of penal liability under Section 138 of the NI Act is that the cheque must be issued by the drawer for the discharge of any legal debt or liability. Existing of legal debt or liability is sine qua non for constituting the offence. 15. Before I advert to the above said ingredients, it is imperative for me to notice the provisions of Sections 118(a) and 139 of the NI Act which read as under: "118. Presumptions as to negotiable instruments.--Un­ til the contrary is proved, the following presumptions CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page7 /11 shall be made­ (a) of consideration.--that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration, and that every such instrument when it has been accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, nego­ tiated or transferred for consideration;" "139. Presumption in favour of holder.--It shall be pre­ sumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque, of the nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. 16. The Division bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Krishna Ja­ nardhan Bhat v. Dattatraya G. Hegde, (2008) 4 SCC 54, has held that the accused can discharge the burden of presumption U/s 118 and U/s 139 of the NI Act by raising a probable defence on the strength of "preponder­ ance of probabilities". 17. In Rangappa Versus Sri Mohan AIR 2010 SC 1898 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is a settled position that when an accused has to rebut the presumption under Section 139 of the NI Act, the standard of proof for doing so is that of `preponderance of probabilities' and if the ac­ cused is able to raise a probable defence which creates doubts about the ex­ istence of a legally enforceable debt or liability the prosecution can fail and for this the accused can even rely on the materials submitted by the com­ plainant in order to raise such a defence and it is conceivable that in some cases the accused may not need to adduce evidence of his/her own. 18. From the reading of the above said provisions and the judg­ ments the position of law which emerges is that once the execution of the promissory note is admitted as has happened in the instant case, the pre­ sumption under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act would arise that it is supported by a consideration. Such a presumption is rebuttable. The accused can prove the non­existence of a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the accused discharges the initial onus of proof show­ ing that the existence of consideration was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the Complainant who will be obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and upon its failure to prove would CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page8 /11 disentitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instru­ ment. The burden upon the accused of proving the non­existence of the consideration can be either direct or by bringing on record the preponder­ ance of probabilities by reference to the circumstances upon which he re­ lies. In case, where the accused fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non­existence of the consideration, the complainant would in­ variably be held entitled to the benefit of presumption arising under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act in his favour. 19. Now coming to the case in hand, in the instant case the accused has examined himself as DW­1 and has admitted that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/D bears his signatures. Further the accused has admitted that he has taken loan of Rs. 35,000/­ from the Complainant in the year 2005. However with respect to the cheque in Question Ex. CW1/D the accused has stated that he has not issued the same in discharge of his liability and the same was given by him to the complainant as a security at the time of taking of the loan in the year 2005. 20. As per the statement of account Ex. CW1/X which is placed on record by CW­1 it is also clear that the loan of Rs. 35412/­ was granted by the complainant to the accused on 07.09.2005 and the same was to be repaid by the accused in 36 monthly installments of 1865/­ each. Therefore it is evident that the entire loan amount was to be repaid by the accused till September 2008. Interestingly, perusal of statement of account Ex. CW1/X reveals that a payment of Rs. 1900/­ has been received by the complainant from the accused on 11.09.2007 and thereafter no payment has been received by the complainant from the accused till 31.01.2011 when last payment of Rs. 4000/­ is alleged to have been given by the accused on 31.01.2011. It is surprisingly to see that when loan was to be repaid by the accused till September 2008 the complainant chooses to remain silent for more than 2 years. It is highly improbable that a finance company would remain silent when no payment is being received by it from the borrower for more than 2 year after expiry of the loan tenure. Further the complainant has not even disclosed as to when the accused has approached them for the CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page9 /11 purposes of handing over of the cheque in question Ex. CW1/D. 21. Further it is the case of the complainant that in discharge of his outstanding liability arising out of the agreement dated 07.09.2005 the accused agreed to pay a sum of Rs. 37,604/ vide cheque in question Ex. CW1/D bearing No.85472 dated 16.05.2012 i.e. six years after the agreement. This acknowledgment even as per the complaint was much after the statutory period of three years which is the prescribed period of limitation for the recovery of an outstanding amount. Furthermore an acknowledgment to be encompassed within the ambit of Section 18 and 19 of the Limitation Act has to be an acknowledgment in writing as well as within the prescribed period of limitation. It was thus not a valid acknowledgment as the Cheque in question Ex. CW1/D was clearly outside the period of limitation. The complainant has also not placed on record any document which states that there was an acknowledgment on the part of the accused well before the prescribed period. Therefore, the cheque cannot be even said to be issued in respect of legally recoverable debt 22. In Vijay Polymers Pvt. Ltd. & Anr 162 (2009) DLT 23 relying upon the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sasseriyil Joseph vs. Devassia 2001 Crl.LJ 24 the Hon'ble Delhi High court had held that cheques issued on a time barred debt would not fall within the definition of 'legally enforceable debt' which is the essential requirement for a complaint under Section 138 of NI Act. 23. In the instant case, the cheque which is the subject matter of this complaint was for the discharge of a liability of a debt arising out of the agreement dated 07.09.2005 which debt had become time barred. Therefore this debt was not a legally enforceable debt within the meaning of Section 138 of the NI Act. 24. All the aforesaid circumstances/factors rebut the presumptions provided under Section 139 of the NI Act. This court do not find any force in the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the Complainant that CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page10 /11 the accused has failed to rebut the presumption under Section 139 of the NI Act. Presumption is not in itself evidence but it only enables a party in whose favour it exists to show that he has a prima facie case. In the case in hand the presumptions under Section 139 of NI Act alone cannot be the sole basis to prove the case of the complainant. The materials and evidence available on the record brought by the complainant do not bridge the gap. Therefore, I hereby hold that the Complainant has not been able to prove and substantiate the allegations that the cheque in question CW1/D was issued by the accused in discharge of legally recoverable debt or other liability. 25. Furthermore, mere non payment of cheque amount within 15 days of receipt of legal notice is not itself sufficient to fasten any liability U/s 138 of the NI Act as it is established that the cheque in question was not issued by the accused in discharge of a legal recoverable debt. 26. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I hereby hold that the complainant has not been able to prove and substantiate its allegation against the accused. Accordingly, accused Sube Singh S/o Sh. Fateh Singh is hereby acquitted for the offence u/s 138 NI Act. This judgment contains 11 pages. Every Page of this judgment has been signed by me Announced in the open Court (RAVINDER SINGH ­II) Dated 27.05.2014 MM (NI Act ­07) DWARKA/NEW DELHI. CC No. 4750/14 Indiabulls Vs. Sube Singh Page11 /11
