DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG135

TITLE: Smt. Dayawati vs Smt. Bhagwati Devi on 29 September, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/23536525/



DOMAIN: Property and Land Law

SUBDOMAIN: Land and Property Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, dayawati, bhagwati, devi, september, financial, property and land law

CONTENT:

-:1:- IN THE COURT OF SH. LAL SINGH, ADJ-03 (SW), DWARKA COURT COMPLEX,NEW DELHI Suit No. 81/10/09 In the matter of : Smt. Dayawati W/o. Shri Ranjit Singh, R/o. RZ-15, Gali No.7, Khasra No.621, Palam Colony, Kailash Puri, New Delhi-45. Also at: 229 Masjid Moth New Delhi-49 ..............Plaintiff. Versus Smt. Bhagwati Devi, W/o. Sh. Attar Singh, R/o. RZ-15, Gali No.7, Khasra No.621, Palam Colony, Kailash Puri, New Delhi-45. ............Defendant. Date of Institution of the Suit: 07/09/2009 Date on which reserved for Judgment: 30/08/2014 Date on which judgment passed : 29/09/2014 JUDGMENT: 1 By this judgment, I shall dispose of the present suit for possession filed by plaintiff against the defendant. Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi 2 The brief relevant facts of the case are that the plaintiff is wife of Sh. Ranjit Singh, and their marriage solemnized on 05.03.1965, and thereafter plaintiff is residing along with her husband at 229, Masjid Moth, New Delhi-49. It is averred that in the month of May, 1965 the husband of plaintiff was appointed as Messenger(IV Class employee) at New Delhi. The defendant is wife of Sh. Attar Singh, who is elder brother of plaintiff's husband and plaintiff was residing alongwith her husband in joint family property at 229, Masjid Moth, New Delhi, alongwith the defendant and her family. Plaintiff also states that due to large family and meager income, the husband of the defendant Sh. Attar Singh was not able to meet his family expenses and the plaintiff and her husband used to help them financially on a regular basis. 3 The plaintiff averred that the plaintiff and her husband decided to buy a piece of land admeasuring 188 square yards, in Khasra No.621, Palam Colony, Kailash Puri, New Delhi-45 i.e. suit land as it was three side open plot (later on the said suit land got renumbered as RZ-15, Gali No.7, Khasra No.621, Palam Colony, Kailash Puri, New Delhi-45), for a total consideration of Rs.2000/-. Plaintiff also claims that plaintiff and her husband were living in a Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi joint family, hence, due to love and affection and also at the request of husband of defendant, husband of plaintiff agreed to purchase the suit land in joint name under the impression that his elder brother i.e. husband of defendant will pay half of the amount of the total consideration amount. It is also averred that, finally, on 20/06/1972 suit land/property was purchased in the joint name of plaintiff and defendant, however, the total consideration amount for purchase of suit land was paid by the plaintiff and her husband and not a single penny was contributed by the defendant and her husband. Plaintiff also averred that the husband of the defendant in the year 1974 paid to the husband of the plaintiff a sum of Rs.200/- only, towards part payment of his share of the sale consideration of the suit land. It is further averred that the sale deed of the said property was got registered by the plaintiff in her as well as in the name of the defendant and physical possession of the premises was also handed over to the plaintiff at the time of registration of the sale deed. 4. As per plaintiff, in the year 1986, both plaintiff and defendant started construction on half portion each of the suit land, although the family of the plaintiff continued to live at the ancestral Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi property, and thus, plaintiff did not complete the finishing work at the suit land and the plaintiff kept the unfinished area of the suit land/suit property locked and occasionally used to go and stay at the suit land. It is alleged by the plaintiff that in the month of December,2008 when the plaintiff and her husband started visiting the suit land regularly with a view to complete finishing work of the suit land, the sons of the defendant, who were already living on the suit land started creating obstacle for the plaintiff and her husband by using one means or the other. It is also alleged by the plaintiff that in the month of March, 2009, the defendant alongwith her husband and their family members broke opened the locks and illegally entered into the portion of the suit premises of the plaintiff and when the plaintiff and her husband came to know about this fact, they immediately lodged a complaint dt. 25/03/2009 with the SHO, PS Palam Vihar, however, no action was taken by the police against the defendant and her family. It is further alleged that on 28/05/2009 when the plaintiff's son visited the suit land then defendant also quarreled with him and threatened to kill the plaintiff's son, for which a complaint was also made in the Police station. Plaintiff averred that as such the defendant is in illegal and Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi unauthorized occupation of the suit premises/land comprising of two rooms and a kitchen and open area. Plaintiff also averred that after March, 2009, the plaintiff and her husband requested the defendant to hand over the vacant and peaceful possession of the premises to them and settle the matter amicably, but the defendant refused to hand over the suit premises to the plaintiff. Hence, plaintiff filed the present suit for possession. 5. Defendant was duly served and thereafter, the defendant filed the written statement. In the WS, it is contended by the defendant that the present suit is not maintainable and liable to be rejected under order 7 Rule 11 CPC. In the WS, defendant also contended that the plaintiff has not approached the court with clean hand and has illegally manipulated and managed the things in her favour. Defendant vehemently denied that the financial condition of the defendant and her husband was so bad. Rather, defendant contended that her husband Attar Singh was in a comfortable and sound financial position. In the WS, defendant also contented that defendant and her husband had planned to purchase a property, however, plaintiff and her husband had expressed their intention to get the property purchased jointly but at the same time they also Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi expressed their inability to share the sale consideration at that time and the plaintiff and her husband assured to reimburse the same as soon as they would become capable. Defendant also contended that thereafter, due to love and affection, the defendant and her husband had purchased the suit land in the joint name vide sale deed dt. 20/06/1972 for a total consideration of Rs.2000/- and plaintiff and her husband agreed to share the sale consideration of Rs.2000/- as being their share of Rs. 1000/-. It is further alleged by the defendant that till the filing of the WS, nothing has been paid by the plaintiff to the defendant. Defendant also denied that the physical possession of the suit land was also handed over to the plaintiff at the time of registration of the sale deed. It is further averred in the WS that defendant and her husband had started construction on the suit land with a faith of reimbursement of sale consideration and construction cost from the plaintiff and her husband. Defendant alleged that the present suit is a gross abuse and misuse of the process of law. It is the contention of the defendant that as the financial condition of the plaintiff and her husband was not good, as such, the defendant and her husband had purchased the suit property in the joint name of the plaintiff and Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi defendant and entire sale consideration amount was paid by the defendant and her husband. In WS, defendant also denied all the averments and allegations as made by the plaintiff in the plaint. 6 Plaintiff has also filed the rejoinder/replication to the WS filed on behalf of defendant and in its rejoinder/replication the plaintiff reiterated the averments made in the plaint. 7 Thereafter, on 20/02/2010 on the basis of pleadings, following issues were framed as under: 1) Whether the plaintiff had purchased the suit property jointly Benami joining the defendant as one of the owner only as Benami transaction?...OPP. 2) Whether the suit property was purchased by the defendant partly Benami in the name of the plaintiff?......OPD. 3) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for?......OPP. 4) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the vacant and peaceful possession of the entire suit property?......OPP. 5) Relief. 8. To prove its case, plaintiff has examined five witnesses in all. Plaintiff has examined herself as PW1 and she has tendered her evidence by way of affidavit vide Ex.PW1/A and also relied upon the documents i.e, certified copy of registered deed dated 20.06.1972 in favour of the plaintiff and defendant vide Ex.PW1/1 and site plan of suit property vide Ex. PW1/2. Plaintiff has also Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi examined her husband Sh. Ranjit Singh as PW2 and her brother Sh. Mange Ram as PW3, who had tendered their evidence by way of affidavits vide Ex. PW 2/A and Ex. PW 3/A respectively. PW4 Sh. Shishu Pal Chandel who is brother in law of the plaintiff has tendered his evidence by way of affidavit vide Ex.PW 4/A. Plaintiff has also examined Sh. Om Parkash, UDC in the office of Sub Registrar-II, Kashmiri Gate, Delhi, who has brought the record in respect of sale deed dated 20.06.1972 and also proved the sale deed Ex. PW 1/1 as per record. All the plaintiff's witnesses have been cross-examined on behalf of the defendant. 9 Defendant has examined herself as DW1 and tendered her evidence by way of affidavit vide Ex. DW1/A. DW 2 Sh. Ram Laxman Gola has tendered his evidence by way of affidavit vide Ex. DW2/A. DW3 Sh. Attar Singh who is the husband of defendant has also tendered his evidence by way of affidavit vide Ex.DW 3/A. All the defendant's witnesses have been cross-examined on behalf of the plaintiff. 10 I have heard the arguments on behalf of ld counsel for both the parties. 11 Ld. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi and defendant are real brothers and at the relevant time they were residing together in joint family property situated at 229, Masjid Moth, New Delhi. It is further contented by counsel for plaintiff that on the assurance given by the defendant and her husband that they will pay their share of sale consideration in the due course of time, husband of plaintiff had purchased the suit land on 20/06/1972 in the joint name of plaintiff and defendant. It is further argued by the counsel for plaintiff that the entire sale consideration amount of Rs. 2000/- for purchase of suit land was paid by the plaintiff and her husband as the plaintiff had adequate financial means in 1972 and defendant has not paid a single penny due to poor financial condition. Counsel for the plaintiff also submitted that in the year 1986 plaintiff and her husband invested all saving in construction of two rooms, one kitchen, one toilet and bathroom on some part of the suit land and the balance land was left as open space. Counsel for the plaintiff also contended that from the bare perusal of the depositions of plaintiff's witnesses as well as defendant's witnesses, it is apparent that plaintiff had no responsibility in the year 1972 and plaintiff had sufficient financial means in the year 1972, to purchase the suit property, whereas, on the other hand, the Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi financial condition of the defendant was not good in the year 1972. It is further submitted by the counsel for the plaintiff that purchase of the suit land by the plaintiff in the joint name is not a Benami transaction. It is further argued by counsel for plaintiff that Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 does not apply in the present case since the land was purchased in 1972 and the said Act became operative in 1988. Counsel for plaintiff also submitted that plaintiff has been able to establish her case and hence the suit of plaintiff may be decreed in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant. Counsel for plaintiff has relied upon the judgment titled as Smt. M. Printer & ors vs. Marcel Martins AIR 2002 Karnataka 191. 12 On the other hand, ld counsel for defendant submitted that the present suit has been filed on the basis of false, frivolous and unsubstantiated averments/allegations made by the plaintiff stating therein that the suit premises/property, was purchased by the husband of the plaintiff in 1972 in the name of the plaintiff and the defendant at the total consideration amount of Rs.2000/- and the defendant had paid a sum of Rs.200/- only in the year 1974 as a part payment of the half share. It is further submitted by the counsel for the defendant that the valuation of the suit property has Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi not been done properly and in accordance with law as the plaintiff has paid the court fee for the relief of possession, however, in the prayer clause, the plaintiff has made prayer in respect of the declaration and possession in respect of the entire suit land. It is further submitted that husband of the defendant was also employed in the government job and family of defendant were also having sundry part time business and therefore, entire expenses of the family, including the husband of the plaintiff was borne by the husband of the defendant. Ld counsel for the defendant argued that entire consideration amount for purchase of the suit property was paid by the husband of the defendant from his own source and savings and out of love and affection the husband of the defendant purchased the suit property in the name of defendant and plaintiff. It is further argued by the counsel for the defendant that entire cost of construction was also paid by the husband of the defendant and there was no contribution on the part of the plaintiff and her husband. Counsel for the defendant also submitted that the factum of the possession over the suit property by the plaintiff at any point of time was also vehemently denied by the defendant. It is further submitted that the brother of the plaintiff in connivance and in Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi collusion with the plaintiff has falsely deposed for the purpose of getting wrongful gain for her sister. It is further argued that plaintiff has failed to prove that she was in the possession of the property at any point of time prior to the alleged dispossession. Counsel for defendant also submitted that the source of income from which the entire consideration amount for purchase of suit property as claimed to be paid by plaintiff, was not proved by the plaintiff. Counsel for defendant has also argued that the plaintiff is not entitled for the suit for declaration till the time the sale deed is subsisting and at no point of time, plaintiff has prayed for cancellation of the sale deed. He also argued that even by virtue of law of limitation and doctrine of adverse possession, the plaintiff is not legally entitled to file the present suit. It is also argued by the counsel for the defendant that it is the case of the plaintiff, (though, not admitted by the defendant), that the defendant has paid only Rs. 200/- towards the total sale consideration and hence, in view of the same, the only remedy available with the plaintiff was to seek recovery of remaining alleged contribution, which the defendant was supposed to pay towards the sale consideration, instead of claiming ownership rights by the plaintiff in the entire suit property. Counsel for Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi defendant submitted that the suit of plaintiff is liable to be dismissed. Ld. Counsel for defendant also relied upon the judgments of Jaydayal Poddar (Deceased) through LRs and Anr. Vs. Mst. Bibi Hazra and Ors. AIR 1974 SC 171 and Abdul Rahiman Vs. Nalakath Muhammed Haji, AIR 1997 Ker 23. 13 I have considered the submissions of ld counsels for both the parties and also gone through the file and perused the evidence on record. 14 My issue wise findings are as under: - As the point of consideration in issue no. 1 and 2 are interconnected, as such, issue no. 1 and 2 are hereinafter dealt together. ISSUE No.1 Whether the plaintiff had purchased the suit property jointly Benami joining the defendant as one of the owner only as Benami transaction?...OPP. Whether the suit property was purchased by the defendant partly Benami in the name of the plaintiff......OPD? The onus to prove the issue no. 1 is upon the plaintiff and onus to prove the issue no. 2 is upon the defendant. In her Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW 1/A, plaintiff/PW 1 deposed that in the month of May, 1972 her brother Sh. Mange Ram suggested to her husband about a piece of land available for sale at Nasirpur Delhi Cantt on a reasonable rate. PW 1 deposed that thereafter she along with her husband visited the site and like the piece of land admeasuring 188 square yards in khasra no. 621 Palam colony, Kailash Puri, Delhi-45 ie the suit property. PW 1 in her evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW 1/A further deposed that lateron the suit land was got renumbered as RZ-15, Gali No. 7, Khasra No. 621, Palam colony, Kailashpuri, New Delhi-45. In her affidavit Ex.PW 1/A, the plaintiff deposed that she and her husband decided to buy the aforesaid land and accordingly negotiated with the owner of the land and after several meetings with the land owner, finally the deal was materialized for total consideration of Rs. 2000/-. The PW 1 in her affidavit Ex. PW 1/A also deposed that the defendant as well as her husband suggested to PW1 and her husband to buy the suit land jointly in the name of plaintiff/PW1 as well as in the name of defendant. PW 1 deposed that despite of her objection, her husband who had great sense of affection and loyalty towards his elder brother, immediately shrugged of her suggestion of buying the suit Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi property in the name of plaintiff only and thereafter, under the pressure of her husband, the suit land was finally purchased on 20.06.1972 in the joint name of plaintiff and defendant. PW 1/plaintiff also deposed that total sale consideration of Rs. 2000/- was paid by herself and her husband only and the defendant and her husband had not contributed at all in the said purchase. The PW 1 also deposed in her evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW 1/A that lateron husband of the defendant in the year 1974 paid to the husband of plaintiff a sum of Rs. 200/- towards the part payment of her share of sale consideration in the suit land. Plaintiff/PW 1 also deposed in her evidence by way of affidavit that in the year 1986 plaintiff and defendant started putting construction on the suit land and the plaintiff and husband of defendant invested all their savings in construction of two rooms, one kitchen, toilet and bathroom on some part of suit land and remaining was left as open space. Plaintiff/PW 1 also deposed that in the year December, 2008, when she along with her husband with a view to complete construction work on the suit land, started visiting regularly, the sons of the defendant started creating obstacles and in March, 2009, defendant along with her husband and their family members broke open the Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi locks and illegally entered into the portion of the suit premises and for that a complaint was also lodged with PS Palam on 25.3.2009. The plaintiff/PW 1 further deposed that on 28.05.2009 when her son visited the suit land, the defendant also quarreled with him and for the same a complaint was made with PS Palam, New Delhi. Plaintiff also deposed that defendant is in illegal and unauthorized occupation of the suit land and she is liable to vacate and hand over the entire suit land to the plaintiff. PW 1 in cross-examination admitted that husband of defendant was in Govt. job. PW 1/plaintiff admitted that the defendant paid money for construction of his house separately. PW 1 also deposed in cross-examination that in her portion of the suit land they have constructed two rooms, one kitchen, one bathroom and open space and there is no electricity meter in her portion of the house. PW 1 also categorically denied that she visited the suit property only in 2009 after having bought the same in the year 1972. 15 PW 2 who is the husband of the plaintiff deposed in his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW 2/A, on the same lines as PW 1. PW 2 specifically denied the suggestion that because his elder Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi brother and defendant both were since working, therefore, they bought the suit property and put it in the joint name. PW 2 also in cross-examination categorically denied that Rs. 2000/- as consideration money of the suit property was paid by his elder brother. PW 2 deposed that infact he bought the suit property in the joint name. Further, PW 2 denied the suggestion that there was no lock on the portion of the house of the plaintiff. 16 PW 3 Sh. Mange Ram who is brother of the plaintiff in his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW 3/A deposed that in 1972 his sister and brother in law approached him to help them to invest money in immovable property and thereafter, he came to know about the suit property and suggested his sister and brother in law for purchase of the same and after several discussions, land owner agreed to sell the suit property for a total consideration of Rs. 2000/- and entire consideration amount for the suit property was paid by the plaintiff and her husband. 17 PW 4 Sh. Shishupal who is the brother in law of plaintiff(husband of sister of plaintiff) in his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW 4/A deposed that Sh. Ranjit Singh refused to take any help from him for purchase of suit property in 1972 and Sh. Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi Ranjit Singh told that he had saved enough money to purchase the land of his own. PW 4 further in his affidavit Ex. PW 1/ 4 deposed that in the year 1986 he visited Sh. Ranjeet Singh many times to his Kailashpuri, New Delhi land, where he was putting up construction on the suit land and the plaintiff and her husband occasionally used to go and stay there. In cross-examination, PW 4 deposed that he does not know as to who paid the full consideration amount for purchase of the suit property. 18 The aforesaid contentions of plaintiff and plaintiff's witnesses were denied by the defendant in her evidence by way of affidavit Ex. DW1/A. DW 1/Defendant deposed in her affidavit Ex. DW 1/A that the plaintiff and her husband agreed to share the sale contribution of Rs 2000/- being their share of Rs. 1000/-, however, till date nothing has been paid by the plaintiff. Defendant/DW 1 further deposed that the suit property had been purchased by the efforts and expenses of her and her husband. DW1 in her affidavit Ex. DW1/A denied that in the month of December, 2008 or any other period, the plaintiff and her husband started visiting the suit property with a view to complete the finishing work of the suit property and also denied the allegations of the plaintiff that in the Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi year March, 2009, she and her husband broke open the locks and illegally entered into the premises. Defendant in her evidence also denied the alleged incident dated 28.05.2009, whereby the plaintiff alleged that defendant quarreled with the son of the plaintiff. DW 1 in her cross-examination specifically deposed that construction work was carried out by her on about 100 square yards and remaining 100 square yards was left to be share of Ranjit Singh. Defendant/DW 1 categorically admitted in cross-examination that Sh. Ranjit Singh(husband of the plaintiff) carried out construction on his part of suit land/property. As such, from the clear cut admission of the defendant, it is apparent that defendant had constructed only over her part of suit property. This admission of defendant also fortifies the contention of the plaintiff that she and her husband also invested for construction on their part of the suit land. 19 Both the plaintiff and the defendant claiming contradictory to each other as plaintiff claims that she has purchased the suit property and paid the entire consideration amount, whereas, the defendant also claims that she had purchased the suit property and she had paid the entire consideration amount. However, both have failed to produce any concrete evidence so as Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi to establish that either of them or their husbands have exclusively paid the entire consideration amount for purchase of the suit property. DW 2 Sh. Ram Laxman Gola in his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. DW 2/A deposed that suit property was purchased by defendant and her husband and he also deposed that the defendant and his family are financially very well of since when he knows them. However, in cross-examination DW 2 deposed that he did not know the financial status of the family of the defendant at the time of purchase of the suit property. DW 2 in his cross stated that he does not know when the suit property was purchased and when construction was started. Therefore, the testimony of DW 2 is of no much help for the defendant, as he was not in a position to explain the financial status of the defendant at the time of purchase of the suit property and also he does not know about the transaction of the suit property. 20 DW 3 who is husband of the defendant in his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. DW 3/A deposed that he and defendant had paid the entire sale consideration of the suit property and plaintiff and her husband till date had not paid their share of Rs. 1000/- to the defendant. DW 3 deposed in cross-examination that in 1972 his Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi salary was about Rs. 100/- and salary of Sh. Ranjit Singh, husband of the plaintiff was about Rs. 80/- in 1972. However, PW 2 husband of the plaintiff in his evidence deposed that at the time of joining, his salary was Rs. 120/- per month and same was enhanced to Rs. 310/- per month in the year 1967. PW 2 husband of plaintiff as well as DW 3 husband of defendant, both failed to produce any documentary evidence regarding their respective salary in the year 1972. Except claiming contradictory stand about their salary, PW2 and DW 3 had failed to prove in evidence as to what was their salary in the year 1972 when the suit property was purchased in the name of their wives ie. Plaintiff and defendant. As such, plaintiff as well as defendant, they both failed to establish that in 1972 when the suit property was purchased, the financial status of other party was not good, so as to pay entire consideration amount of the suit property. 21 In the entire plaint as well in the WS of the defendant, both the parties have not taken the plea of benami transaction. Plaintiff claims that financial condition of the defendant was not good, as such, due to love and affection and under pressure from her husband, she purchased the suit property in the joint name of the plaintiff and defendant and entire consideration amount was Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi paid by plaintiff and her husband. However, similar ground was taken by the defendant and defendant contended that defendant and her husband had paid the consideration amount believing that plaintiff will reimburse their share of amount. The plaintiff and defendant are admittedly having closed relations as their husbands being real brothers. In these circumstances, the investment made by their husbands, for the purchase of the suit property in the name of their wives, does not amount to benami transaction. Moreover, there is also force in the contention of counsel for plaintiff that benami transaction(Prohibition) Act, 1988 does not apply in the present case, since the suit property/land was purchased in 1972 and the said act become operative in the year 1988. Further, in the judgment titled as Binapani Paul vs Pratima Ghosh, (2007) 6 SCC 59, it was observed that benami transaction(Prohibition) Act, 1988 has no retrospective effect. The source of money being an important factor for determining benami nature of transaction, the onus lay on the plaintiff. 22 In the instant matter, the counsel for the plaintiff contended that the transaction of the suit property is not a benami transaction, as the suit property was not purchased as benami Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi transaction. In the judgement of Smt. Printer & ors vs Marcel Martins AIR 2002 Karnataka 191, wherein it was observed that if a person in whose name the property is purchased also has contributed consideration for purchase of the suit property in his name along with others whose name is not reflected in the sale deed, it would not amount to a benami transaction as defined under the Act. 23 In the present matter, both the parties contended that along with them their respective husbands have also contributed in purchasing the suit property. The relationship of the parties and surrounding circumstances as well as the motive governing the action of the parties, in bringing about the transaction in their subsequent conduct, are also very relevant. In the instant case, none of the parties could establish that they had exclusively purchased the suit property and the other party had not paid or contributed for the purchase of the suit property. There is no dispute that the suit property have been purchased in the joint name of the plaintiff and defendant. The sale deed dated 20.06.1972 is in favour of plaintiff and defendant in respect of the suit property have been proved by the plaintiff vide Ex. PW 1/1. Moreover, PW 4 Sh. Om Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi Prakash UDC in the office of Sub Registrar -II, Kashmiri Gate, Delhi also proved the sale deed dated 20.06.1972 vide Ex.PW 1/1 as per record. Hence, there is no dispute that the suit property was purchased in joint name of plaintiff and defendant. The only dispute is that the plaintiff claims that she and her husband paid the entire consideration amount, whereas, defendant claims that she and her husband paid the entire consideration amount. The cross-examination of PW 4 who is brother in law of plaintiff is also very crucial, as in cross-examination PW 4 categorically deposed that he does not know as to who paid the full consideration amount of purchase of the suit property. As such, this weakens the claim that plaintiff and her husband had exclusively paid the consideration amount of the suit property. Moreover, there is also contradiction in the testimony of PW 1 and PW 2 as on one hand they deposed that plaintiff and her husband ie. PW 2 had exclusively paid the entire sale consideration amount, and whereas, on the other hand, they had also taken the stand that defendant had paid only Rs. 200/- (Rupees Two hundred only) towards the part payment of sale consideration. Hence, plaintiff failed to prove that plaintiff had purchased the suit property jointly Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi benami joining the defendant as one of the owners as benami transaction. 24 The defendant also contended that suit property was purchased in the joint name of the plaintiff and defendant and entire consideration amount was paid by defendant and her husband. However, defendant also failed to produce anything material on record which would show that defendant and her husband had exclusively paid the consideration amount. The defendant in her cross-examination categorically deposed that at the relevant time, she had shortage of money. This admission of defendant in her cross-examination belies her contention that in the year 1972 she and her family were financially placed in better condition, then, the plaintiff and her husband. Moreover, the defendant in her cross also admitted that to purchase the suit land, she had borrowed the money. Had the condition of the defendant and her family was so good at the relevant time when the suit property was purchased, then, where the occasion arises to borrow the money. On this aspect also, there is no satisfactory explanation on behalf of the defendant. Defendant/DW 1 in cross examination also admitted that she had carried out construction on about 100 square yard on the suit land Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi and remaining 100 square yards were left for the share of plaintiff and her husband. If the defendant had paid the entire consideration amount as claimed by her, then, why she had left the half of the suit land to the plaintiff as the share of the plaintiff. Moreover, defendant also admitted in cross-examination that plaintiff and her husband carried out the construction on their part of the suit land. This shows that the suit land was purchased by the plaintiff and defendant contributing equally for purchase of the same. Moreover, DW 2 also deposed that he does not know the financial status of the defendant at the time of purchasing the suit property. The testimony of DW 2 also weakens the stand of the defendant that financial status of her family was good in the year 1972 when the suit property was purchased. Further, DW 3 husband of defendant in cross- examination specifically deposed that in the year 1972, he had no money saved due to the marriage of his daughter in 1968. This shows that defendant and her husband were not having sufficient money in 1970 and they have not brought any material that after 1970 within two year ie. Upto 1972, they had earned sufficient amount to pay the entire sale consideration of the suit property. Therefore, defendant has also failed to prove that the suit property Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi was purchased by defendant partly benami in the name of the plaintiff. Plaintiff failed to prove the issue no. 1 and defendant failed to prove the issue no. 2. As plaintiff and defendant failed to prove issue no. 1 and 2 respectively, as such, it can be concluded that the suit property was purchased by plaintiff and defendant jointly and they both contributed for the same equally. Therefore, it is held that the suit property has been purchased jointly by the plaintiff and defendant in their joint name and also equally contributed for the purchase of the suit property. Hence, the aforesaid issues no. 1 and 2 are decided accordingly in the aforesaid terms. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for?......OPP. The onus to prove this issue is also upon the plaintiff. Plaintiff has claimed that she had paid the entire consideration amount for the purchase of the suit property and as such prayed that declaration be made in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant that the plaintiff is the owner of the suit land bearing RZ 15 Gali No. 7 Khasra No 621, Palam colony, Kailashpuri, New Delhi. While deciding the aforesaid issue no 1, it has already been held Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi that plaintiff has failed to establish that she had paid the entire consideration amount for purchase of the suit property and purchased the suit property jointly benami joining the defendant as one of the owner. Plaintiff has also failed to prove that the defendant has not contributed equally for the purchase of the suit property. The suit property has been admittedly purchased in the joint name of plaintiff and defendant vide sale deed dated 20.06.1972 vide Ex. PW 1/1. Admittedly, the plaintiff as well as defendant had carried out the construction in their respective half share of the suit property. It is the contention of the defendant that the defendant is residing at the suit property. The plaintiff had alleged that in the year 2008 when the plaintiff and her husband visited regularly in the suit property, then, the defendant and her family started creating troubles to the plaintiff and in the month of March, 2009, defendant and her husband broke open the locks and illegally entered in the plaintiff's portion of the suit premises. Plaintiff has no where either in plaint or in evidence stated that the plaintiff was in exclusive possession of the suit property since the purchase of the same. Rather, as per her own admission, plaintiff used to visit the suit property occasionally and she and her husband Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi has constructed two rooms, kitchen etc in their portion of the suit property and same was also unfinished and therefore, they put locks of the unfinished premises. Though, the defendant denied the allegations of the plaintiff that the defendant and family of defendant had broke open the locks of the portion of the suit premises of the plaintiff and entered into the same illegally. Plaintiff had also relied upon the complaint dt. 25/3/2009 as mark A', in respect of alleged breaking of locks in the portion of the suit property of the plaintiff by the defendant. The plaintiff has not brought the original of the complaint dt. 25/3/2009 or not summoned any witness from the PS Palam, Delhi, to produce the aforesaid original complaint so as to prove the complaint dt. 25/3/2009. However, the defendant contended that since the police authorities have sensed the foul and concocted play and ploy of the plaintiff and hence, no action was taken by the police against the defendant and her family members. As such, there is no dispute regarding lodging of complaint on 25/3/2009 and subsequent complaint dt. 28/3/2009 regarding the alleged quarreling with the son of the plaintiff by the defendant. However, the defendant denied the allegation made against the defendant in the aforesaid Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi complaints. 26 Therefore, even as per the allegations of the plaintiff that the defendant had entered illegally in the half portion of the premises of the plaintiff in the suit property after breaking the locks. As such, it is amply clear that the plaintiff had not disputed the fact that the defendant was atleast residing/occupying half portion of the suit property till the alleged dispossession of the plaintiff from the remaining half portion of the premises of the plaintiff also. The plaintiff has further failed to produce any material or evidence on record to show that the defendant was not residing over atleast half portion of the suit property since it was purchased in the joint name of plaintiff and defendant. Even the plaintiff in her cross examination admitted that the defendant used to live in their portion of suit property and also spent money for construction of her house by the defendant separately. It has been proved in evidence of the parties that plaintiff was never remained in the possession of entire suit land at any point of time since its purchase. Construction of the defendant in her portion of the suit property and possession of the defendant over half portion of the suit property was admitted by the plaintiff. Further, while deciding the issue no.1 and 2, it has Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi been already held that the suit property was purchased jointly by the plaintiff and defendant and also both equally contributed for the purchase of the sale. Hence, the declaration in respect of entire suit property in favour of the plaintiff, as prayed by the plaintiff, can not be made. Moreover, the suit property has been admittedly owned in the joint name of the plaintiff and defendant vide sale deed Ex.PW1/1 dt. 20/6/1972 and as such, the plaintiff can not claim the ownership of the entire suit property. The plaintiff can not be held as the exclusive owner of the entire suit property. However, as the suit property has been registered in joint name of the plaintiff and defendant and as such plaintiff has every right of ownership in respect of half portion of the suit property as being the joint owner of the suit property. Therefore, as such, the plaintiff has ownership right in respect of only half portion of the suit property as the suit property being purchased in joint name of plaintiff and defendant and defendant has ownership right of the remaining half portion of the suit property. This issue is accordingly decided, thereby declaring that the plaintiff has ownership rights in respect of only half portion of the suit property being joint owner of the suit property. The issue is decided accordingly in the aforesaid terms. Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi 27 ISSUE NO.4. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the vacant and peaceful possession of the entire suit property? The onus to prove this issue is upon the plaintiff. The plaintiff alleged that the defendant and her family members allegedly broken the locks of the portion of the suit premises of the plaintiff. Plaintiff has also stated to have made complaint dt. 25/3/2009 for the alleged breaking of locks by the defendant. However, the defendant contended that as the complaint was false and as such no action was taken by the police. Defendant in her cross examination categorically admitted that she had carried out construction on about 100 square yards and remaining 100 square yards over the suit property was left for the share of plaintiff and husband of the plaintiff. This admission of the defendant shows that they were in possession of only half portion of the suit land. The defendant has also not brought on record any material or evidence in support of her contention that the defendant was staying in the entire suit property till the alleged dispossession of the plaintiff from the half share of the plaintiff over the suit property by the defendant. Moreover, the defendant in cross examination also Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi admitted that the plaintiff and her husband carried out construction on their part of the suit land. This specific admission of the defendant is in conformity of the deposition of the plaintiff and her husband PW2 that they had constructed the two rooms, one kitchen and toilet and bathroom in the portion of the premises of the plaintiff in the suit land. Plaintiff and her husband alleged that the defendant and her family members illegally entered into the portion of the premises of the plaintiff in the suit property after breaking the locks of the premises of the plaintiff. Though, the defendant has denied the allegation of the plaintiff, however, the defendant and her husband have not denied the factum of lodging of the complaint regarding the alleged breaking of locks. The copies of the police complaint dt. 25/3/2009 mark A and subsequent complaint dt. 28/5/2009 mark B' had been relied by the plaintiff so as to substantiate that the defendant and her family member illegally and unauthorizedly entered into the portion of the premises of the plaintiff after breaking the locks of the premises. The defendant has not produced any material on record that prior to March, 2009 (i.e. prior to the alleged illegally occupation of the portion of the premises of the plaintiff by the defendant after breaking the locks) Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi the defendant was in possession of entire suit property. Therefore, in these circumstances, the plaintiff has established that the defendant had illegally dispossessed the plaintiff from half portion of the premises of the plaintiff in March, 2009. Though, the plaintiff is seeking possession of entire suit land, but, the plaintiff failed to brought on record any material that plaintiff has exclusively owned the suit property or the plaintiff was in possession of the entire suit land at any point of time. Hence, the plaintiff is only entitled for recovery of vacant and peaceful possession of half portion of the suit property i.e. the share of the plaintiff in the suit property. Accordingly, this issue is decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant in the aforesaid terms. 28 Relief. As held above, the plaintiff has failed to prove issue no.1 and defendant has also failed to prove issue no.2. While deciding the issue no.1 and 2, it has been held that the plaintiff and defendant had jointly purchased the suit property and further the plaintiff and defendant had equally contributed for the purchase of suit property. Further, while deciding issue no.3, it has been held that plaintiff has ownership rights in respect of only half portion of the suit property Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi being joint owner of the suit property. In the issue no.4, it has been held that the plaintiff is only entitled for recovery of vacant and peaceful possession of half portion of the suit property i.e. the share of the plaintiff in the suit property. 29 Therefore, suit of the plaintiff is partly allowed and decreed as under: i) A decree is passed in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant, thereby declaring that the plaintiff has ownership rights in respect of only half portion as share of plaintiff in the suit property i.e. land bearing No. RZ-15, Gali No.7, Khasra No. 621, Palam Colony, Kailash Puri, New Delhi-45, as shown in the portion of plaintiff in the site plan Ex.PW1/2. ii) A decree of possession is passed in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant in respect of half portion as share of plaintiff in the suit property i.e. land bearing No. RZ-15, Gali No.7, Khasra No.621, Palam Colony, Kailash Puri, New Delhi-45, as shown in the site plan Ex.PW1/2 and defendant is hereby directed to hand over the vacant and peaceful possession of half portion of the suit property i.e. the share of the plaintiff in the suit property as shown in the portion of Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi plaintiff in the site plan Ex.PW1/2 within two months from today. 30 Plaintiff is also entitled to cost. 31 Decree sheet be prepared accordingly. 32 File be consigned to the record room. ANNOUNCED IN THE OPEN COURT ON 29/09/2014 (LAL SINGH) ADJ-03(SW)/ DWARKA COURTS NEW DELHI. Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi. 29/09/2014 Present: Sh. Deepak Kumar, proxy counsel for counsel for plaintiff. Sh. Anjani Kumar, proxy counsel for counsel for defendant alongwith defendant. The matter is coming up today for judgment. Vide my separate judgment of even date, suit of the plaintiff is partly allowed. Plaintiff is also entitled to cost. Decree sheet be prepared accordingly. File be consigned to record room. (Lal Singh) ADJ-03(SW)/ Dwarka Courts/N.D. 29/09/2014 Suit No. 81/10/09 Smt. Dayawati Vs. Smt. Bhagwati Devi
