DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG105

TITLE: Sh. Rakesh Gupta vs . Devender Jain on 17 January, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/65684006/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, rakesh, gupta, devender, jain, january, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI VINOD KUMAR MEENA, CIVIL JUDGE­ 02,NEW DELHI DISTRICT, PATIALA HOUSE COURTS, NEW DELHI Sh. Rakesh Gupta vs. Devender Jain Case ID No. : 02403R0066672011 CC No. : 271/12/12 Date of Institution of the Complaint :13.09.2011 Name and address of Complainant : Sh. Rakesh Gupta Proprietor of M/s Bala Enterprises 1350, HSIDC Rai Industrial Estate, Haryana. Name, parentage and address of the accused : Sh. Devender Jain Prop. Devendra Industries Plot No.195,HSIDC, Kundli, Phase­4, Sonepat Haryana. Also at:­ C/o Sh. Ganga Ram Jain 16/11, Shakti Nagar, Delhi­110007 Offence Complained of : U/s 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 Offence Proved : No Plea of the Accused in his : Impugned amount was already examination. paid through RTGS by accused. Date of reservation of Order : 13.12.2013 Final Order : 17.01.2014 Date of Order : 17.01.2014 Police Station : Connaught place CC No. 271/12 Rakesh Gupta v Devender Jain 1 of pages 10 JUDGMENT 1. The present complaint was filed by complainant Sh. Rakesh Gupta proprietor of M/s Bala Enterprises and is engaged in manufacturing and supplying of PVC Compound Grinding and Plastic Goods and G.I.Wires Accused used to place orders with the complainant from time to time and complainant used to supply the same as per the orders and directions of the accused against invoices. It is further alleged that an amount of Rs. 13,95,697/­ was due upon the accused against which accused had issued a cheque bearing no. 437808 for a sum of Rs. 1,35,000/­ dated 19.04.2011 drawn on Canara Bank, SME branch Wazirpur, Delhi, to discharge his part liability. The complainant bonafidely presented the impugned cheque to his bankers but the cheque was returned unpaid/dishonoured with remarks " Funds insufficient" vide return memo dated 22.07.2011. Therefore, accused failed to discharge his liabilities despite the service of the legal demand notice dated 06.08.2011 within stipulated time. Thus the accused committed an offence U/s 138 NI Act . Bail bond and Notice 2. The court took cognizance of the offence U/s 138 of NI Act and issued process to the accused. The accused was later admitted to bail. After hearing arguments on Notice, Notice u/s 251 Cr. P.C was served upon to the accused to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 3. Thereafter, the case was fixed for complainant's evidence and complainant was directed to supply copy of the affidavit and annexed documents to the accused. Substance of complainant's evidence and cross examination 4. According to the list of witnesses filed by the complainant in pre­ summoning, the complainant had wished to examine himself only as CW1. 5. CW1 adduced his pre­summoning as well as post summoning evidence by way of affidavit and relied upon the documents Ex. CW1/A to Ex. CW1/E4, which are as follows: (i) Ex. CW1/A is original cheque bearing no.437808 (ii) Ex. CW1/B is the confirmation of accounts singed by accused. (iii) Ex. CW1/C is cheque returning memo (iv) Ex.CW1/D is legal notice dated 06.08.2011 and (v) Ex.CW1/D1 and Ex. CW1/D2 are postal receipts (vi) Ex. CW1/E1 to Ex. CW1/E4 are return letter, courier receipts and POD respectively. CC No. 271/12 Rakesh Gupta v Devender Jain 2 of pages 10 In his cross­examination he stated that his affidavit of evidence got prepared by his counsel and he has no knowledge from where the same has been got prepared. Accused is known to him for the last five years and in the year 2009 he has started business transaction with him. He used to supply his goods i.e P.V. C Compounds Grinding and plastics goods and GI wires worth Rs. 50 to Rs. 60 lakhs to 4­5 buyers. He further admitted that he also used to supply goods on oral demand. He further voluntarily stated that he has never received orders in writing. He has also stated that he used to supply goods worth Rs. 20,00,000/­ approximately. He also used to receive payment from the accused in running manner and also used to raise invoices against the goods supplied to the accused. He further admitted that he used to receive payment from the accused regularly in his account bearing no. 039186­20000011 in HDFC Bank, Panchwati, Adarsh Nagar, He has also deposed that he used to receive the party regular payment from the accused. CW1 further denied that he has received the payment in respect of impugned cheque. However, he admitted that he has received the payment of Rs. 1,35,000/­ through RTGS in his account on 23.04.2011. Complainant did not produce any other witness and complainant evidence was closed and matter was listed for recording statement of accused u/s 313 Cr. P. C. Substance of statement of accused recorded U/s 313 Cr. P.C. 6. All the incriminating circumstances were put to the accused and his statement U/s. 313 Cr. PC was recorded to which he stated that he had issued the impugned cheque for the discharge of his legal liability. However, he has cleared the payment through RTGS to the complainant. Despite this and his repeated requests the impugned cheque was not returned to him by the complainant. He further stated that impugned cheque bears his signature and he has also filled the other details in the impugned cheque. However, he admitted the dishonour of the impugned cheque and also stated that he had received the legal demand notice. However, accused did not preferred to lead defence evidence and matter was listed for final arguments. Defence pleaded by the accused 7. From the cross­ examination of the complainant and the statement of the accused recorded U/s 313 Cr. P.C, it appears that the accused in his defence pleaded that the impugned cheque was issued by him in discharge of his legal liability, however, payment was made through RTGS to the complainant. He has also received legal demand notice. CC No. 271/12 Rakesh Gupta v Devender Jain 3 of pages 10 Judgment and Reasons 8. Final arguments of both the parties were heard at length and later on clarifications were sought. 9. It has been observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rangappa v Sri Mohan1, that ordinarily in cheque bouncing cases, what the courts have to consider is whether the ingredients of the offence enumerated in Section 138 of the Act have been met and if so, whether the accused was able to rebut the statutory presumption contemplated by Section 139 of the Act. It was further observed that the test to be applied in cases U/s 138 NI Act is one of preponderance of probabilities, which has been held in various other case law as well. For the purpose of reaching a decision in the present matter, it is thus important to first decide whether the complainant has been able to fulfill the ingredients as enumerated under section 138 NI Act and if yes, then decide if the accused has been able to rebut the statutory presumption contemplated by Section 139 of NI Act. 10. Further in M/s Kumar Exports v. M/s Sharma Carpets2 it has been observed as follows:­ The accused in a trial U/s 138 NI Act has two options. He can either show that consideration and debt did not exist or that under the particular circumstances of the case the non existence of consideration or debt is so probable that a prudent man ought to suppose that no consideration or debt existed. To rebut the statutory presumption the accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. 11. The essential ingredients which need be proved for constituting the offence under Section 138 NI Act were discussed in the case Jugesh Sehgal v. Shamsher Singh Gogi3. In view of the judgment and also the provisions U/s 138 NI Act, an offence U/s 138 NI Act is committed when a person draws a cheque on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, and that cheque is returned by the bank unpaid due to "insufficient funds" or "exceeds arrangements" or any other such reasons. Further, as per proviso to Section 138 NI Act, the drawer shall be liable only if; 1 2010 Cri. L.J. 2871 2 AIR 2011 SC 1518 3 2009 (9) SCALE 455 CC No. 271/12 Rakesh Gupta v Devender Jain 4 of pages 10 A) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of validity, whichever is earlier; B) the holder of the cheque makes a demand for the payment of the cheque amount by giving a legal notice to the drawer within 30 days of receipt of information by him from the bank regarding dishonor; C) the drawer of the cheque fails to make the payment to the drawee within 15 days from receipt of legal notice. 12. On perusal of the file it is seen that the cheques bearing no.437808 dated 19.04.2011 drawn on Canara Bank Wazirpur Delhi, was given to the complainant allegedly towards the repayment of loan amount. However, when the complainant presented the impugned cheque to her bankers the same cheque was returned unpaid/dishonoured with remarks' Funds insufficient' on 22.07.2011. Thereafter, a legal notice dated 06.08.2011 was sent to the accused within stipulated time, however, accused failed to discharge his liabilities despite the service of the legal demand notice within stipulated time i.e 15 days from the service of legal notice. Thus the complainant has filed sufficient evidence to raise the presumption u/s 139 NI Act. 13. The issue is whether the accused has been able to rebut the presumption U/s 139 NI Act. In order to answer this question, it is important to see the cross examination of the complainant and defence of the accused. 14. The documents filed by the complainant and the accused have been carefully perused. After going through all the records placed in the case file by both the parties, evidence adduced by both the parties and after hearing the submissions of both the parties, it came to the fore that the accused is relying on the defence that he has paid the entire payment towards the cheque amount through RTGS on 23.04.2011 and he has no liability towards the complainant. 15. As far as the plea of defence of the accused is concerned i.e that he has paid the entire payment towards the cheque amount through RTGS on 23.04.2011 and he has no liability towards the complainant, it is submitted by the Ld. Counsel for the accused that the impugned cheque in question was issued to discharge legal liability on 19.04.2011 for a sum of Rs.1,35,000/­. However, accused made the payment of Rs.1,35,000/­ towards the cheque amount through RTGS on 23.04.2011. It is further submitted by the Ld. Counsel for the accused that despite the fact that accused has cleared the payment towards the cheque amount, the complainant has not returned the impugned cheque in question, despite repeated request from the accused and CC No. 271/12 Rakesh Gupta v Devender Jain 5 of pages 10 presented the same for the encashment before the bank just to create a false ground for lodging a false complaint u/s 138 N.I. Act to extort illegal money from the accused. Per contra, it is submitted by the Ld. Counsel for the complainant that accused has made a payment of Rs.1,35,000/­ on 23.04.2011. However, the payment of Rs.1,35,000/­ on 23.04.2011 was made by the accused to discharge some other liability than the impugned cheque in question. After hearing the submissions of both the parties and after going through the evidence adduced by both the parties and after going through documents produced by both the parties, it is observed by the Court that the impugned cheque in question was issued to discharge the liability of Rs.1,35,000/­ dated on 19.04.2011. It is also observed by the Court that it is submitted by the accused in his defence throughout the trial that he had made payment towards the impugned cheque in question through RTGS on 23.04.2011. It is also pertinent to mention here that it is admitted by the complainant in his cross­examination as CW1 that he had received a payment of Rs.1,35,000/­ through RTGS in his account on 23.04.2011, though the complainant has denied that the payment was towards the impugned cheque in question. The relevant para is quoted as under for the sake of clarity. "It is wrong to suggest that I have received the payment in respect of cheque in question. It is correct that I have received a payment of Rs.1,35,000/­ through RTGS in my account on 23.04.2011". It is also observed by the Court that the document annexed with the complaint i.e. the confirmation of the account are the computer generated documents and the same are not accompanied with the certificate/affidavit under Section 65­B of Indian Evidence Act. So keeping in mind the provisions under Section 65­B of Indian Evidence Act and also keeping in mind the observation made by Hon'ble Apex Court in "State Vs. Md. Afzal and Others, 2003 IV AD (CR) 205" as well as observations made by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in "Devesh Kumar Vs. State (Cr. Appeal No. 793/2004) decided on 10.02.2010", the documents cannot be read into evidence as the same are not accompanied with the affidavit/certificate under Section 65­B of the Indian Evidence Act. It is again pertinent to mention here that the accused has maintained same defence throughout the trial i.e. that he had made payment through RTGS on 23.4.2011; It is admitted fact that impugned cheque in question is dated 19.4.2011 for the sum of Rs. 1,35,000/­ and admittedly a payment of Rs. 1,35,000/­ was made by the accused on 23.4.2011 through RTGS. The admitted fact that the same amount as mentioned in the impugned cheque had been made by the accused after the issuance of the cheque support the version of the accused that he had made payment to discharge his liability of Rs. 1,35,000/­ as mentioned in the impugned cheque in question. After CC No. 271/12 Rakesh Gupta v Devender Jain 6 of pages 10 going through the above mentioned observations and discussions, the Court of the view that accused has raised a probable defence. 16. It is now trite that the accused may rebut the presumptions from the circumstances of the case and need not lead positive evidence for rebuttal. At this stage, the court deem it fit to quote certain material observations as made by Hon.Supreme Court in Krishan Janardhan Bhat vs. Dattatraya G. Hegde4. "...20. Indisputably,a mandatory presumption is required to be raised in terms of Section 118 (b) and Section 139 of the Act. Section 13 (1) of the Act defines "negotiable instrument" to mean " a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque payable either to order or to bearer." Section 138 of the Act has three ingredients, viz: (i) that there is a legally enforceable debt; (ii)that the cheque was drawn from the account of bank for discharge in whole or in part of any debt or other liability which presupposes a legally enforceable debt; and (iii)that the cheque so issued had been returned due to insufficiency of funds. 21. The proviso appended to the said section provides for compliance of legal requirements before a complaint petition can be acted upon by a Court of law. Section 139 of the Act merely raised a presumption in regard to the second aspect of the matter. Existence of legally recoverable debt is not a matter of presumption Under Section 139 of the Act. It merely raises a presumption in favour of a holder of the cheque that the same has been issued for discharge of any debt or other liability. 24. In Bharat Barrel & Drum Manufacturing Company vs. Amin Chand Pyarelal 1999 AIR SCW 636, para 12. interpreting Section 118 (a) of the Act, this Court opined: "Upon consideration of various judgments as noted herein above, the position of law which emerges is that once execution of the promissory note is admitted, the presumption under Section 118 (a) would arise that it is supported by a consideration. Such a presumption is rebuttal. The defendant can prove the non­existence of a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the defendant is proved to have discharged the initial onus of proof showing that the existence of 4. AIR 2008, Supreme Court 1325 CC No. 271/12 Rakesh Gupta v Devender Jain 7 of pages 10 consideration was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the plaintiff who will be obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and upon its failure to prove would dis­entitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. The burden upon the defendant of proving the non­existence of the consideration can be either direct or by bringing on record the preponderance of probabilities by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies. In such an even, the plaintiff is entitled under law to rely upon all the evidence led in the case including that of the plaintiff as well. In case, where the defendant fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non­existence of the consideration, the plaintiff would invariably to be held entitled to the benefit of presumption arising under Section 118 (a) in his favour. The Court may not insist upon the defendant to disprove the existence of consideration by leading direct evidence as the existence of negative evidence is neither possible not contemplated and even if led, is to be seen with a doubt..." (emphasis supplied) 25. Furthermore, whereas prosecution must prove the guilt of an accused beyond all reasonable doubt, the standard of proof so as to prove a defence on the part of an accused is "preponderance of probabilities". Inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only from the materials brought on records by the parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies.(emphasis supplied) A statutory presumption has an evidentiary value. The question as to whether the presumption whether stood rebutted or not, must, therefore, be determined keeping in view the other evidences on record. For the said purpose, stepping into the witness box by the appellant is not imperative. In a case of this nature, where the chances of false implication cannot be ruled out, the background fact and the conduct of the parties together with their legal requirements are required to be taken into consideration." 17. In Kumar Exports v. Sharma Carpets5 discussing at length the question of the rebuttal of the presumption, it was observed: 5. (2009) 2 SCC 513 CC No. 271/12 Rakesh Gupta v Devender Jain 8 of pages 10 "....Apart from adducing direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not supported by consideration or that he had not incurred any debt or liability, the accused may also rely upon circumstantial evidence and if the circumstances so relied upon are compelling, the burden may likewise shift again on to the complainant. The accused may also rely upon presumptions of fact, for instance, those mentioned in Section 114 of the Evidence Act to rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of The Act. The accused has also an option to prove the non existence of consideration and debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial...." 18. In Birender Singh Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) and Anr.6 it was held: "5. There is no doubt that the burden rests on the accused to rebut the presumption as raised under Sections 139 and 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act. However, this presumption can be rebutted by the accused not merely by examining his own witnesses but even by cross­examination of the complainant and his witnesses and bringing out on record, through cross­ examination, that the complainant was altar and there was no privity of contract between the complainant and the accused and cheques were misused." 19. As quoted above, the standard of proof so as to establish a defence on the part of an accused is 'preponderance of probabilities'. Inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only from the materials brought on record by the parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies. After carefully scrutinizing and analyzing the evidence together with the circumstances discussed above,there is no doubt in the mind of Court that the accused has come up with a highly probable defence. The Court is of the opinion that there is sufficient material on record to displace the presumptions raised under The Act. Infact the circumstances and material on record contradict the averments made in the complaint and rather indicate towards the fact that the complainant has infact instituted a false and fabricated complaint. 20. In totality of the circumstances and the discussions above, the Court is of the considered view that the accused has proved his defence on the 6 .I (2008) BC 452, CC No. 271/12 Rakesh Gupta v Devender Jain 9 of pages 10 basis of preponderance of probabilities and successfully rebutted the presumptions raised under The Act. Conclusion 21. As quoted above, the standard of proof so as to establish a defence on the part of an accused is 'preponderance of probabilities'. Inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only from the materials brought on record by the parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies. After carefully scrutinizing and analyzing the evidence together with the circumstances discussed above,there is no doubt in my mind that the accused has come up with a highly probable defence. I am of the opinion that there is sufficient material on record to displace the presumptions raised under The Act. Infact the circumstances and material on record contradict the averments made in the complaint and rather indicate towards the fact that the complainant has infact instituted a false and fabricated complaint. 22. In totality of the circumstances and the discussions above, I am of the considered view that the accused has proved his defence on the basis of preponderance of probabilities and successfully rebutted the presumptions raised under The Act. Decision 23. In the considered opinion of the Court, in view of the legal provisions and case law discussed, the accused is not held guilty for the offence u/s 138 NI Act and is accordingly acquitted for the offence u/s 138 N. I. Act. Announced in open Court on 17.01.2014 (Vinod Kumar Meena) Civil Judge­02/NDD PHC/New Delhi CC No. 271/12 Rakesh Gupta v Devender Jain 10 of pages 10
