DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG098

TITLE: Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa vs Smt. Bandana Jha Page 1/11 on 3 May, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/186294680/



DOMAIN: Criminal Law

SUBDOMAIN: Criminal Justice

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, case, pushpa, bandana, page, financial, criminal law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI RAVINDER SINGH­II METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE DWARKA COURTS, NEW DELHI Case No. : 4339/14 Unique Case ID No. : 0240SR0126322013 Smt Pushpa W/o Sh. Parveen Kumar R/o Flat No­122, Pocket 13, Phase­I Dwarka, Near Mangla Puri DDA Office New Delhi­110045. ...................................Complainant Versus Smt. Bandana Jha W/o Sh. Mihir Kumar Jha R/o Flat No­191, Pocket 13, Phase­I Dwarka, Near Mangla Puri DDA Office New Delhi­110045. ....................................Accused Date of Institution: 15.05.2013 Plea of the accused: Pleaded Not Guilty Date of Reserving Judgment: 03/05/2014 Sentence or final Order: Convicted Date of Judgment: 03/05/2014 JUDGMENT BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE CASE 1. By way of the present judgment, I shall decide the complaint case U/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (hereinafter Said as NI Act) filed by the complainant Smt Pushpa against the accused Smt. Bandana Jha W/o Sh. Mihir Kumar Jha. PROLOGUE (COMPLAINANT'S VERSION) 2. The encapsulated facts as perceptible from the complaint are that the accused being personally known to the complainant had taken personal loan of Rs. 1,20,000/­ from the complainant for her personal Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 1/11 needs and the same was granted to the accused by the complainant on the assurance of the husband of the accused. It is further alleged that the said loan was granted by the complainant to the accused in the presence of commonly known persons. It is further alleged that in order to discharge her liability towards the loan amount the accused issued two post dated cheque bearing no. 239303 & 239305 dated 12.03.2013 &. 14.03.2013 respectively amounting to Rs. 60,000/­each both drawn on State Bank of Patiala, Defence Colony, Ring Road Branch, in favour of the complainant. It is further alleged that the husband of the accused i.e Mihir Kumar Jha assured the complainant that the said cheques shall be encashed on its presentation without any hindrance. It is further alleged that thereafter complainant presented the aforesaid cheques in question for encashment with its banker Oriental Bank Of Commerce, Palam Branch and the same were dishonoured vide cheque returning memo dated 20.03.2013 both with remarks "Account Closed". It is further alleged that thereafter the complainant has given a legal notice of demand dated 03.04.2013 to the accused which was sent to the accused through Speed post and courier thereby calling upon the accused to make the payment of the cheque amount. It is alleged that the accused has failed to pay any sum in response to the legal notice of demand as a result of which the complainant has filed the present complaint for prosecution of the accused U/s 138 of the NI Act. 3. After the complaint was filed, the complainant Smt Pushpa led her pre­summoning evidence by way of an affidavit and after hearing the counsel for the complainant and considering the entire material and documents on record, summons were issued against the accused by the court vide order dated 16.05.2013 for the offence U/s 138 of NI Act. On appearance of the accused a separate notice U/s 251 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (hereinafter said as the Code) dated 25.07.2013 was given to the accused to which she pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Thereafter, the accused moved an application under section 145(2) of the NI Act and the said application of the accused was allowed and the Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 2/11 matter was listed for complainant's evidence. COMPLAINANT'S EVIDENCE 4. The complainant Smt Pushpa got herself examined as CW1 and adopted her pre summoning evidence affidavit Ex. CW1/A. CW­1 also relied upon documents Ex. CW1/1 to Ex. CW1/7. Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 are the original cheque's in question, Ex. CW1/3 is the cheque returning memo, the legal notice of demand dated 03.04.2013 is Ex. CW1/4 and courier receipt and speed post receipt vide which the aforesaid notice was sent is Ex. CW1/5 & Ex. CW1/6 respectively, Ex. CW1/7 is the speed post tracking report. 5. The complainant also examined one Mahender Singh as CW­2. CW­2 tendered his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. CW2/A. Both CW­1 & Ex. CW2 were duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused. Thereafter, the complainant's evidence was closed at request of the complainant. STATEMENT OF ACCUSED U/S 313 OF THE CODE 6. Thereafter the statement of accused was recorded U/s 313 of the Code in which all the incriminating evidence along with exhibited documents were put to the accused Bandana Jha. The accused denied that she knows the complainant and also denied that she has taken personal loan from the complainant to the tune of Rs. 1, 20,000/­ from the complainant for her personal need. The accused person denied that the loan was granted to her by the complainant in the presence of Mahender Kumar (CW­2) in the month of April, 2011. The accused further denied that CW­2 (Mahender Kumar) also gave an amount of Rs. 15,000/­ to the complainant for advancing her the entire loan amount of Rs. 1,20,000/­. It is further stated by the accused that the cheque's bears her signatures but she denied the contents of the same. The accused further stated that she has given blank cheques to one Parveen Pal who is Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 3/11 the husband of the complainant as she has stood guarantor for one Sindhu Vikas Sahu who has taken loan from Parveen Pal the husband of the complainant. It is further submitted by the accused that she is not aware about the dishonor of the cheque's in question. The accused further denied the receipt of legal demand notice and stated that the present complaint case is a false case and the complainant has deposed against her falsely. The accused further stated that Sandhu Vikas Sahu has repaid the loan to Parveen Pal who is the husband of the complainant in presence of one Shelly and Vinod. It is also stated by the accused that she was made to sign some blank papers by Parveen Pal the husband of the complainant. It is also stated by the accused that when she demanded back her security cheques from Parveen Pal the same were not returned by him and she was told to collect the same later on. It is also submitted by the accused that the cheque's in question were given as security cheques and she owes no liability towards the complainant. Thereafter the case was fixed for defence evidence. DEFENCE EVIDENCE. 7. The accused examined herself as a defence witness DW­1. The defence witness DW­1was duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the complainant. Thereafter defence evidence was closed at request of the accused and the case was listed for final arguments. FINAL ARGUMENTS 8. Final arguments were addressed on behalf of both the parties. I have heard Ld. Counsels for both the parties and perused the entire record of the case file Before proceeding further it is imperative for me to go through the relevant provisions of law. Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act provides that: "Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc, of funds in the account:Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 4/11 any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in while or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation:For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability. APPRECIATION OF EVIDENCE IN THE LIGHT OF THE INGREDIENTS OF SECTION 138 OF THE NI ACT AND THE DEFENCE RAISED BY THE ACCUSED 9. It is not disputed by the accused that the Cheque's in Question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 are drawn on the account maintained by her. Signature's on the cheque's in question has also not been disputed by the accused. Further the presentation, dishonor of the Cheque's in question and the cheque returning memo has also not been challenged by the accused. Therefore in view of the evidence on record it stands proved that the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 were signed by the accused and the same were drawn on account maintained by her. Further it also stands duly proved that the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 were dishonored vide cheque returning memo Ex. Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 5/11 CW1/3 dated 20.03.2013 both with the reason "Account Closed" 10. From the perusal of the entire evidence it has come to fore that two fold defence has been taken by the accused. Firstly, that she has not been served with the legal demand notice by the complainant. And secondly that the blank signed cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 has been issued by her to the husband of the complainant Parveen Pal as a security when she stood as a guarantor for Sandhu Vikas Sahu who took loan from the husband of the complainant Parveen Pal and not in discharge of her loan liability as alleged by the complainant. 11. Coming to the first line of defence taken by the accused that she has not been served with the legal demand notice from the complainant, it is pertinent to note that the complainant Smt. Pushpa who has examined herself as CW­1 has specifically stated in her evidence affidavit Ex. CW1/A that she got issued the legal notice of demand dated 03.04.2013 to the accused which is Ex. CW1/4 and it was sent to the accused by speed post and courier on 05.04.2013 and 08.04.2013 respectively, receipts of which are Ex. CW1/6 & Ex. CW1/5 respectively. The complainant has also tendered the speed post tracking report as Ex. CW1/7. 12. The accused has denied the receipt of legal demand notice both at the time of framing of Notice U/s 251 of the Code and also in his state­ ment U/s 313 of the Code. I have perused the legal notice of demand. It bears the correct address of the accused and the speed post receipt Ex. CW1/5 issued by the postal authorities in ordinary course is also on record. Further Section 114 Illustration (f ) of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 also raises a rebuttable presumption in favour of the complainant that common course of business has been followed in a particular case, that is to say, when a letter is sent by post by prepaying and properly addressing it, the same is presumed to have been received by the addressee. Further­ more the speed post tracking report Ex. CW1/7 is also on record by the Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 6/11 complainant which shows the status as 'delivered' and the same has not been disputed by the accused in evidence. Except denial no evidence has been lead by the complainant to corroborate her stand. Therefore, mere denial on the part of the accused at the time of framing of Notice U/s 251of the Code and also in her statement U/s 313 of the Code would not be sufficient to dislodge the burden of presumption casted upon her by Section 114 Illustration (f ) of Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Moreover, sum­ mons was served upon the accused at the address mentioned in the com­ pliant and the accused has put his appearance in compliance thereof. 13. In C.C. Alavi Hazi Vs. Palapetty Mohd. & Anr. (2007) 6 Supreme Court case 555, it was held that the course open to the drawer where he claims not to have received the notice sent by post but has received copy of the complaint with the summons is that he can within a 15 days of the receipt of summons make payment of the cheque amount and he then cannot contend that there was no proper service of notice. 14. Therefore, considering the evidence on record I find that the accused has not brought any credible evidence to rebut the presumptions provided in Section 114, Illustration (f ) of the Evidence Act, 1872 and further looking at the mandate given by the H'onble Supreme Court in C.C. Alavi Hazi Vs. Palapetty Mohd. & Anr (Supra), I hold that the legal notice of demand Ex. CW1/4 was duly served upon the accused. 15. Now coming to the second line of defence which has been taken by the accused that she has issued the blank signed cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 to the husband of the complainant Parveen Pal as a security when she stood as a guarantor for Sandhu Vikas Sahu who took loan from the husband of the complainant Parveen Pal and not in discharge of her loan liability as alleged by the complainant. 16. Before I advert to the second line of the defence taken by the accused it is imperative for me to go through the provisions of Sections Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 7/11 118(a) and 139 of the Act which read as under: "118. Presumptions as to negotiable instruments. --Until the contrary is proved, the following pre­ sumptions shall be made­ (a) of consideration.--that every negotiable instru­ ment was made or drawn for consideration, and that every such instrument when it has been ac­ cepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for consideration;" "139. Presumption in favour of holder.--It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque, of the na­ ture referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability." 17. The Division bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Krishna Janard­ han Bhat v. Dattatraya G. Hegde, (2008) 4 SCC 54, has held that the ac­ cused can discharge the burden of presumption U/s 118 and U/s 139 of the NI Act by raising a probable defence on the strength of 'preponder­ ance of probabilities'. 18. In Rangappa Versus Sri Mohan AIR 2010 SC 1898 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is a settled position that when an accused has to rebut the presumption under Section 139, the standard of proof for doing so is that of `preponderance of probabilities'. Therefore, if the accused is able to raise a probable defence which creates doubts about the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution can fail. The accused can rely on the materials submitted by the com­ plainant in order to raise such a defence and it is conceivable that in some cases the accused may not even adduce evidence of his/her own. 19. From the reading of the above said provisions and the judgments the position of law which emerges is that once execution of the promis­ sory note is admitted, the presumption under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act would arise that it is supported by a consideration. Such a presumption is rebuttable in nature. The accused can prove the non­ existence of a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the accused Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 8/11 discharges the initial onus of proof by showing that the existence of con­ sideration was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the Complainant who will be obliged to prove it as a mat­ ter of fact and upon its failure to prove would disentitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. The burden upon the accused of proving the non­existence of the consideration can be either direct or by bringing on record the preponderance of probabilities by ref­ erence to the circumstances upon which he relies. In case, where the ac­ cused fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non­exis­ tence of the consideration, the complainant would invariably be held en­ titled to the benefit of presumption arising under Section 118(a) and Sec­ tion 139 of the NI Act in his favour. 20. Now coming back to the case in hand, in the instant case the complainant has examined herself as CW­1 and stated that the accused is known to her and the accused has approached her for grant of the loan, and accordingly a loan of Rs 1,20,000/­ was granted to the accused by the complainant and in order to discharge the loan liability the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 has been issued by the accused. The complainant in support of her claim has also examined one Mahender Singh as CW­2. CW­2 Mahender Singh in his evidence supported the stand of the complainant and stated that the entire loan transaction between the complainant and the accused has taken place in his presence. CW­2 also stated that he has also given Rs. 15,000/­ to the complainant at her request as she needed the same for advancing the loan to the accused. The accused has examined herself as DW­1 and denied the allegation of the complainant and stated that the blank signed cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 has been issued by her to the husband of the complainant Parveen Pal as a security when she stood as a guarantor for Sandhu Vikas Sahu who took loan from the husband of the complainant Parveen Pal and not in discharge of her outstanding loan liability as alleged by the complainant. Perusal of the entire evidence reveals that except denials and suggestion the accused has not lead any cogent evidence to corroborate her stand and dent the stand of the Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 9/11 complainant. Further it is also surprising to see that the accused has not even examined the said Sandhu Vikas Sahu in her defence for whom she has purportedly issued the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 to the husband of the complainant. It is trite to say that mere denial on the part of the accused and putting suggestions to the complainant's witness and giving explanations without leading any defence to corroborate her stand would not absolve her from any liability. It was for the accused to prove the circumstances under which the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 were issued by her by leading cogent evidence so as to discharge and rebut the presumption raised against her by the Statute U/s 139 and 118 (a) of the NI Act and mere simplicitor denying the allegations would not be at her advantage. The accused has not brought any material on record and also no cogent explanations or any probable defence which would rebut the shadow of presumption existing in favour of the Complainant. Therefore, this court do not find any force in the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the accused that she has succeeded in rebutting the presumption under Section 139 of the Act. 21. From the materials brought on record and evidence lead by the complainant it is sufficient to hold that the accused has taken loan from the complainant and has issued the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 in discharge of her liability. 22. Now coming to the issue that except signatures other particulars in the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 & Ex. CW1/2 has not been filled by the accused, for this defence also except arguments, denials and sugges­ tions accused has not brought any evidence on record to support her stand i.e. except signatures she has not filled the other particulars in the cheque's in question. Furthermore even believing the stand of accused to be correct, still there is also no evidence on record to show that she has not even authorized the complainant to fill the said particulars. More so it is trite to say that by putting the name and date there is no material Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 10/11 alteration on the cheque U/s 87 of the NI Act as there is no rule of banking business that the name of the payee as well as the amount should be written by the drawer himself, as no law provides that in case of cheque the entire body has to be written by the drawer only. Therefore, once the signature on the cheque in question is admitted as has hap­ pened in the case in hand the plea that particulars in the cheque in ques­ tion has not been filled by the drawer is of no consequence unless some cogent evidence has been lead by the accused that he/she has not ex­ pressly or impliedly authorized the payee to fill the particulars therein. (See Ravi Chopra Vs. State and Another, 2008(2) JCC (NI) 169, Delhi, Jaipal Singh Rana Vs. Swaraj Pal 149 (2008) DLT 682,) Therefore, this defence of the accused also holds no ground. 23. Considering the evidence on record, It stands duly proved that the accused has miserably failed to rebut the presumptions U/s 118 (a) and section 139 of the NI Act. Furthermore, accused has also failed to prove that she has made payment to the complainant within 15 days from the receipt of the legal demand notice. 24. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I hereby hold that the complainant has proved and substantiated its allegation against the accused and all the ingredients of Section 138 of NI Act also stands proved against the accused. Accordingly, Smt. Bandana Jha W/o Sh. Mihir Kumar Jha is hereby convicted of the offence u/s 138 NI Act. This judgment contains 11 pages. Every Page of this judgment has been signed by me Copy of this judgment be given to the convict free of cost. Announced in the open Court (RAVINDER SINGH ­II) Dated 03.05.2014 MM (NI Act ­07) DWARKA/NEW DELHI. Case No. : 4339/14 Smt Pushpa Versus Smt. Bandana Jha Page 11/11
