DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG138

TITLE: Allied Automation Engineering vs . P. Shankar on 22 August, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/145301804/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, allied, automation, engineering, shankar, august, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI PRASHANT SHARMA, Ld. ACJ/ARC/CCJ, PATIALA HOUSE COURTS, NEW DELHI. Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar 1.Srl. No. of the case & Date of institution 188/1/12 & 18/12/12 2.Name of the complainant Allied Automation Engineering 3.Name of the accused person P. Shankar, Proprietor of Convotech Projects JG­1/97, Vikaspuri, (Outer Ring Road), New Delhi. 4.Nature of offence complained of U/s. 138 NI Act. 5.Plea of the accused persons Accused pleaded not guilty 6. Date reserved for order 19.08.2014 7.Final Order Convicted 8.Date of such order 21.08.2014 Date of Institution : 16.08.2012 Date of order reserved : 19.08.2014 Date of pronouncement : 22.08.2014 Page no. 1 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 BRIEF FACTS OF THE CASE: 1. Present case pertains to offense of dishonor of cheque punishable U/s 138 & 142 of Negotiable Instrument Act(hereinafter Act). 2. Allied Automation Engineering Services Pvt. Ltd. (Hereinafter referred as complainant ) has filed the present complainant case alleging that it is a registered Company, engaged in the business of providing Mechatronix Solutions & Products to industries. That during course of its business, P. Shankar (hereinafter accused) being proprietor of Convotech Projects, having its office at JG­ 1/97, Vikas Puri, Outer Ring Road, New Delhi - 110018, had placed purchase order Ex. CW 1/AA, to the complainant, thereby demanding certain goods. Complainant after receiving the said purchase order delivered the same to accused by invoice no. A0002 dated 04.04.2012 Ex. CW 1/B vide delivery challan Ex. CW1/C. That cost of the said books, as per complainant amounted to Rs. 139926/­ only. That in order to discharge the said liability, accused issued cheque Ex. CW1/D, which was dishonored when presented to the concerned banker vide cheque returning memo Ex. CW 1/E. Consequently, complainant issued legal notice Ex. CW1/G on non receiving of the cheque amount in question, within statutory period. That the said legal notice was sent through registered AD Ex. CW1/F and Speed Post Ex.CW1/H. That accused did not pay the cheque amount in question and therefore complainant was forced to file present complaint case. 3. After filing of the case Court issued Summons against accused after finding Page no. 2 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 sufficient material on record. 4. Accused appeared in the Court after receiving the summons and after completion of procedural formalities pleaded in response to notice U/s 251 Cr.P.C that the cheque in question was issued by Convotech Projects, which was given as a security cheque against another cheque, which had to be issued from Convotech Projects Ltd., Bawal, Haryana. That the order was placed by Convotech Projects Ltd. And not Convotech Projects. That complainant had wrongly issued bill in the name of Convotech Projects, which in any case never received any goods from complainant. Therefore, in such circumstances, Convotech Projects had no liability to pay cheque amount in question. 5. Accused , consequently moved application U/s. 145(2) NI Act, praying that he may be allowed to cross examine complainant. Said application after consideration was allowed by the Court. Matter was then fixed for Post Summoning Complainant Evidence. This Court therefore considered the present case as summons trial in nature and not in summary trial. 6. During Post Summoning Complainant Evidence, complainant examined its AR Rajesh Kumar CW­1 who in his deposition deposed that he was authorized on behalf of complainant, on the basis of Extract Board Resolution passed by the Board of Directors of Complainant Company Ex.CW1/A. He also placed on record, certificate of incorporation Ex. CW1/A1. He also reiterated the contents of the complaint, which are not repeated here for the sake of brevity. After his examination, post summoning complainant evidence was closed, at request of AR for complainant and matter was fixed for statement of accused. Page no. 3 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 7. In response to that incriminating evidence placed on record, which was put the accused, accused raised the defense in sync with his explanation given in response to notice U/s 251 CrPC. Same is not repeated here for the sake of brevity. In addition to that he also explained that he had to receive the require goods on credit basis of 30 days and had to pay cheque amount in question after said expiry of 30 days. That he had asked complainant to remove Rs. 39926/­ , from the demand made by complainant, which was never accepted by complainant. He admitted that he has the liability to pay Rs. 1,00,000/­ to complainant and also admitted that he had received the requisite machine/goods from complainant. 8. In his defense accused did not lead any defense evidence, therefore, matter was fixed for judgment after final argument was heard. Appreciation of law. 9. In order to understand the rival contentions, it is useful to refer section 138 of the Act which reads as under 138. Dishonor of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account.­ where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an arrangement made with that bank, such persons shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a Page no. 4 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided hat nothing contained in this section shall apply unless­ (a) The cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) The payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) The drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment to the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation:­ For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability". 10. In order to constitute an offence under section 138 of the N.I Act, Hon'ble Apex Court, in Jugesh Sehgal Vs. Shamsher Singh Gogi, (2009) 14 SCC 683, noted the following ingredients which are required to be fulfilled: (i) A person must have drawn a cheque on an account maintained by him in a bank of payment of a certain amount of money to another person from out of that account; (ii) The cheque should have been issued for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability; (iii) That cheque has been presented to bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity whichever is earlier; (iv) That cheque is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of the account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with the bank; (v) The payee or the holder in due course of the cheque makes a Page no. 5 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque is unpaid; (vi) The drawer of such cheque fails to make payment of the said amount of money to the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque within 15 days of the receipt of the said notice. 11. Being cumulative, it is only when all the aforementioned ingredients are satisfied that the person who had drawn the cheque can be deemed to have committed an offence under section 138 of the Act. 12. In order to appreciate whether aforesaid ingredients have been completed to constitute offence U/s. 138 NI Act, I find that there are certain rebuttable presumptions in favour of holder of a cheque. They are mentioned in section 118 and section 139 NI Act. 13. Hon'ble Apex Court in various cases had the occasion to harmoniously construe aforesaid special rules of evidence mentioned in NI Act. Some of the said case laws, which I found relevant, are mentioned in my subsequent paragraphs. 14. In the case of Bharat Barrel and Drum Manufacturing Company Vs. Amin Chand Payrelal (Ref: 1999 II AD(S.C.) 221=AIR 1999 SC 1008) it was held that Although the Court is under an obligation to raise the presumption contemplated under sections, 118, 138 and 139 NI Act in every case, where the factual basis for raising the presumption has been established by the complainant, the accused is required to raise a probable defence Page no. 6 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 or rebut such a presumption by leading evidence or bringing such facts on record in the cross examination of the complainant that could make the latter's case improbable. For doing so, it is no necessary for the accused to disprove the existence of consideration by way of direct evidence. The standard of proof has been held to be preponderance of probabilities and the inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only from the materials that have been placed on record, but also by reference to the circumstances upon which the accused relies. If the accused is proved to have discharged the initial onus of proof placed on him by showing that the existence of consideration was improbable or doubtful or illegal, then the onus will shift back to the complainant who will then be under an obligation to prove its as matter of fact and failure to do so will dis­entitle him to any relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. 15. In case of Hiten P. Dalal Vs. Bratindranath Banerjee 2001 V AD (S.C.) 206= (2001) 6 SCC. 16 it was held that It is a settled legal position that under the scheme of Negotiable Instruments Act, a statutory presumption has been created in favour of the holder of the negotiable instrument in due course. Section 139 stipulates that the Court shall presume liability of the drawer of the cheque for the amount for which the cheque is drawn and section 118 envisages that unless the contrary is proved, it shall be presumed that the negotiable instrument including a cheque has been drawn for Page no. 7 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 consideration. The aforesaid presumption therefore can be rebutted by the accused. The said rebuttal need not to be in the form of defence evidence. If the case of complainant fails, at it end on the basis of probabilities raised by the accused during course of cross examination, then the aforesaid presumptions, stands rebutted. 16. Section 118 NI Act talks about certain rebuttable presumptions which Court has to presume, in cases like the case in hand, viz. that every cheque was made or drawn for consideration, that every cheque bearing a date was made or drawn on such date, that every transfer of cheque was made before its maturity, that the endorsement appearing on a cheque was made in order in which they appear thereon, that a cheque is duly stamped and that holder of such cheque is a holder in due course. There is a proviso annexed with the said section, which says that if the said cheque is obtained by means of offence or fraud or for unlawful consideration then the burden of proving that holder is a holder in due course lies upon the person, asserting it. Section 139 NI Act directs that unless contrary is prove, it shall be presumed that holder of a cheque received the cheque in the manner mentioned in section 138 NI Act for the discharge, in whole or in part of any debt or other liability. Both the aforesaid presumptions, mentioned above tilt the case of dishonor of cheque, in favour of the holder/complainant. It is for the accused to rebut those presumptions, either through defense evidence or through shortcomings in the case of complainant, based on probabilities. 1 17. Coming back to the facts of the present case, I am now appreciating various aspects, from which present case has been argued by the litigating parties in the background of Page no. 8 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 evidence and pleading before me. Appreciation of debt/liability of accused. 18. Case of the complainant was based on liability of accused to pay cheque amount in question on the basis of goods supplied to accused as per tax invoice Ex. CW1/B and delivery challan Ex. CW 1/C. Accused on his part, did not dispute the due execution of the said documents or the fact that those documents were prepared in lieu of goods supplied to accused. Besides that delivery of goods in question to accused at his delhi address was also not in dispute. The net result was that so far as complainant was concerned it had done its part once it supplied the required goods to accused. In such situation complainant was successful in raising presumption U/s 118 of the Act to the effect that cheque in question was issued by accused in response to the delivery of goods in question. Further, the said delivery of goods on question, led to presumption U/s 139 of the Act, to the effect that cheque in question was issued by accused in discharge of his liability to pay cost of goods in question to the complainant. Liability of accused as proprietor of Convotech Projects or as proprietor of Convotech Projects Ltd. 19. Complainant in this case filed case against accused in his capacity as proprietor of Convotech Projects. On the other hand it was Convotech Projects Ltd. which had placed purchase order Ex. CW1/AA. So accused by virtue of the said discrepancy argued that it had no responsibility to pay/cheque amount in question, as it was issued by him as proprietor of Convotech Projects which in turn had not placed their placed the purchase order Ex. CW1/ AA. Said argument of accused was not tenable for the reasons that accused on his part never Page no. 9 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 disputed the fact that he had executed the cheque in question. The said admission on his part sealed the fate of this case, as for attracting liability U/s 138 of the Act, a person is required to be shown to have executed a cheque. The said requirement was fulfilled in the present case. Besides that accused did not dispute the fact that he had placed purchase order Ex. CW1/AA. He did not dispute the fact that he had placed that order in his capacity as director/proprietor of Convotech Projects Ltd. . He also did not dispute the fact that he had executed cheque in question as proprietor of Convotech Projects. In such situation the only corollary, which could be drawn was that accused was the person who had placed purchase order. Whether he was director/proprietor of Convotech Projects or Convotech Projects Ltd., did not make a difference. It was for the accused to have explained as to how his liability to pay cheque amount in question differed from him being a proprietor of Convotech Projects, from him being proprietor of Convotech Projects Ltd.. Accused did not suggest during recording of evidence, even the said difference in his liability. He did not lead any evidence to that effect. Even otherwise, once he did not dispute the delivery of goods to him, by complainant, onus shifted on him, to have proved as to how he was not responsible to pay cheque amount in question. So, proprietorship of accused as proprietor of Convotech Projects or Convotech Projects Ltd. did not make any difference. 20. Apart from aforesaid aspects, I found that accused did admit in his reply U/s 313 CrPC, that after purchasing electric motor from complainant, he had given cheque in question to the complainant as security, which was to be replaced by complainant with another cheque and that another cheque had to come from Convotech Projects Ltd.. By giving such explanation , accused shouldered the responsibility with the complainant, for proving his liability to pay Page no. 10 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 cheque amount in question. I failed to understand as to why accused gave a cheque of Rs. 139926/­ to complainant, when he had purchased electric motor from complainant for an amount of Rs. 1,00,000/­ only. Apart from that accused failed to explain as to what was the relation between Convotech Projects and Convotech Projects Ltd.. There was no explanation by accused with regard to why he preferred to issue cheque in question to be replaced by another cheque. Accused did not explain as to how he was interested in the transaction between complainant and Convotech Projects Ltd.. All the aforesaid shortcomings in the statement of accused U/s 313 CrPC created dent in the version of accused. 21. Accused in his statement U/s 313 CrPC admitted that he had to pay Rs. 139926/­ after expiry of 30 days, as he had taken the machine in question on credit basis for 30 days. Again said version gave clear proof against accused, regarding his liability cheque amount in question. Further the fact that accused had not mentioned the exact date from which 30 days had to be calculated indicated that the said version was a vague version. Apart from that, accused did not mention the exact date when the said period of 30 days had to expire, which made the version of accused unbelievable. 22. Accused had refuted his liability to pay Rs. 39926/­, out of cheque amount in question. He claimed in his statement U/s 313 CrPC that the said amount was higher excise duty, calculated by complainant, contrary to the agreement and therefore he was not liable to pay the said amount. Said explanation by accused was again bald assertion only, for the reason that he did not explain as to how aforesaid amount was extra/higher excise duty. He failed to mention as to what was the exact understanding between him and complainant,with regard to Page no. 11 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 amount payable by him. Therefore, said explanation by accused in his reply to the incriminating evidence U/s 313 CrPC, was of no consequence. Authorization of CW 1 to depose on behalf of complainant 23. Accused disputed the fact that CW 1 Rajesh Kumar was an Authorized Representative of complainant Company. He drew my attention towards absence of minutes of meeting, from the record, in which Board Resolution Ex. CW 1/A was passed. I did not find the said argument tenable, for the reasons that Complainant being a registered Company, was not disputed by accused. Further, it was also not disputed that at the time of passing of Board Resolution Ex. CW1/A. Anil Kumar & Neelam Anil Kumar were not its Directors. Therefore, Board Resolution Ex. CW1/A was a duly executed document. In such situation, it was not argued that no minutes of the said meeting were recorded ever. Rather, it had come on record, during cross examination of CW 1 that "no minutes were recorded in the said meeting". There was every possibility that the said minutes were recorded subsequently. Accused did not rule out the said possibility. There was no suggestion given to CW 1 to the effect that no minutes of the said meeting were recorded ever. Said record of minutes of meeting, was relevant as it would have cushioned the claim of CW 1 regarding him being an authorized person on behalf of complainant. It was not the mandate of law, that in every case filed by a company, said record has to be placed. It was required as one of the proofs amongst other proofs to show that a person was duly authorized by the Company, after following due process of law under the Companies Act. In the given case, Board Resolution Ex. CW1/ A, which was never disputed by accused was sufficient proof produced by CW 1, for showing his authority to depose on behalf of complainant company. Even otherwise relevance of record of Minutes of Meeting of Page no. 12 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 Directors of Complainant Company lost its significance, once accused admitted the delivery of goods and his liability to pay cheque amount in question, though said admission qua the liability was qualified but the said qualification was not proved by accused, resulting in his tacit admission of his liability to pay cheque amount in question. 24. With regard to the aspect of relevance of record of minutes of meeting, accused relied upon two case laws, which I found were not factually applicable on the facts of the present case. 25. In the Ma Saraswati Cooperative Urban Thrift and Credit Society Limited, Crl.l.P No. 573/13 passed on 18.03.2014, complainant was not a company rather was a society which had issued loan to principle borrowers. When principle borrowers defaulted in paying back the loan amount in the form of monthly installments, accused, who had stood surety, issued cheque which was dishonored and as a result of that said case was filed by the society. In the said case, during cross examination of AR of the society, it was conceded by the said AR that he had no knowledge about the number of members of the society who had passed the resolution. He did not produce the minutes book during trial and failed to produce the same in the proceedings before Hon'ble High Court. Taking note of the said conduct, it was observed by Hon'ble Justice S. Murlidhar in para 12 of the said judgement that "the society ought to have by now placed on record the relevant minutes, if in deed it was available". It was in such circumstances, that non filing of minutes of meeting was found to be a fact, which went against the case of the society. In the given case in hand, there was no cross examination with regard to whether CW­1 could have filed the record of minutes of meeting, if it is sought. There was no suggestion given to Page no. 13 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 CW­1 to the effect that no record of minutes of meeting in question was available and therefore same was not filed by the complainant. Accused in this case, tried to take benefit of one probable interpretation of the reply of CW­1, which I have already appreciated in my preceding paragraphs, for which no benefit can be given to accused as there is always counter interpretation in favour of complainant also, qua the said reply of CW­1. 26. In Director Maruti Foods and Farms Pvt. Limited Vs. Basanna Pattekar 2008 Criminal Law Journal 157, again facts revealed that AR of complainant company had not produced any documentary proof to show that he was authorized by the company to depose on behalf of the company. Same was not the situation in the present case, as CW­1 had filed copy of Board Resolution Ex.CW1/A, to show his authority to depose on behalf of complainant company. 27. Aforesaid appreciation of evidence of CW­1, on behalf of complainant company let to the conclusion that complainant company was able to discharge its initial onus of proving its case. Per contra accused raised the plea that he was falsely implicated by complainant company, but failed to develop his case on the said premise, as there was nothing on record, which could have suggested remotely that complainant company had filed the present case with some oblique motives. Appreciation of pleas of accused. 28. The plea of accused that cheque in question was a security cheque was not a tenable plea, for the reason that delivery challan Ex.CW1/C proved, in addition to the admission of accused that goods in question were delivered to accused on 04.04.2012. Cheque Page no. 14 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 in question Ex.CW1/D was dated 25.04.2012, which meant that it was issued consequent to the receiving of goods in question. Therefore as on 25.04.2012, accused had the liability to pay cheque amount in question, which also meant that cheque in question was not a security cheque. 29. So far as plea of accused regarding mentioning of factum of accused providing Tin Number to complainant company vide mark A(copy of E­mail dated 04.04.2012) in para 5 of affidavit of CW­1 Ex.CW1/1 to be beyond pleadings, was concerned, I discarded the same as law of pleadings, is strictly to be followed in civil proceedings. In criminal law, complainant has the right to clarify his stand, based on facts, relevant to the fact in issue. In the present case complainant through affidavit of its AR Ex.CW1/1 in para 5 mentioned that accused had E­ Mailed Tin number(which is a number for the purpose of taxation, given in business transactions) to complainant company, which was issued by accused, being proprietor of Convotech Projects instead of Convotech Projects Limited, suggested that accused in his capacity as proprietor of Convotech Projects had conceded the delivery of goods in question, which were ordered by Convotech Projects Limited. The contents of the said document were neither challenged by accused nor I found the said contents, out of context, in the present case. The said E­Mail, though not proved as per law was relevant, as it indicated that accused had admitted the factum of delivery of goods in question, qua which he had issued cheque in question. 30. Accused has also raised the plea that present complaint case is barred by Page no. 15 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 limitation. Record reveals that there is only a bald suggestion given to complainant witness with regard to present complaint being barred by limitation, which was refused by the said witness. At the very outset I found the said plea, a mere plea only, bereft of any details as to how present complainant case is barred by limitation. During course of arguments, counsel for the accused submitted that there is a delay of one day in filing present complaint case. The said argument was not raised during trial. Even otherwise, I did not find the said argument tenable, as this case was filed within limitation period. Further said aspect can be used from another angle also which is that once this Court has summoned accused, then this Court cannot review its own order. Summoning of accused, was done by this Court after finding present case within limitation amongst compliance of other necessary provisions. Therefore the aforesaid plea of accused is not tenable. 31. In view of aforesaid appreciation of evidence on record, I hold accused guilty for committing offence punishable U/s. 138 NI Act. Announced in open Court (PRASHANT SHARMA) on 22nd August 2014 ARC/ACJ/CCJ: New Delhi Patiala House Courts/22.08.2014 Page no. 16 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12 Complaint Case No. 188s/1/12 Allied Automation Pvt. Ltd. Vs. P. Shankar. 22.08.2014 Present: Counsel for complainant along with complainant. Counsel for accused with accused. At this stage, it is found that certificate of incorporation and purchase order are both referred as Ex.CW1/A1. After giving notice to both the counsels for the litigating parties, the said inadvertent mistake in marking of the said documents, purchase order is now marked as Ex.CW1/AA. Both the counsels have given their no objection to the said marking at this stage. The said marking is done at this stage, as it is a mere procedural error only which should not affect the substantial rights of the parties. Vide my judgment of even day, I hold accused guilty for committing offence punishable U/s. 138 NI Act. Put up for arguments on sentence on 30.08.2014 at 02.00 pm. (PRASHANT SHARMA) ARC/ACJ/CCJ: New Delhi Patiala House Courts/22.08.2014 Page no. 17 Allied Automation Engineering Vs. P. Shankar CC No. 188/1/12
