DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG139

TITLE: B.M. Raju vs Smt. Ashwathamma on 21 October, 2015

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Bangalore District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/145002494/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, raju, ashwathamma, october, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF THE LI ADDL. CITYF CIVIL & SESSIONS JUDGE AT BENGALURU CITY. (CCH 52) Dated this the 21st day of October 2015 PRESENT: Sri G.D.Mahavarkar, M.A., LL.B (Spl), M.L. (Lab & Indstrl Rlns & Adm. Laws), LL.M (Business) Laws), M.Phil-in-Law (Juridical Science) LI Addl. City Civil & Sessions Judge, Bengaluru City. Crl. Appeal No. 395/2013 Appellant : B.M. Raju, Original Complainant S/o. Marisiddappa, Aged about 46 years, R/a. C/o. Lord Mary, Nearby Church, Holebeedi Road, Dodda Begur, Bangalore - 570 068. And also at: Provisions Store, Next to V.J.Bakery, Last Bus Stop, Kudlu, Sarjapura Hobli, Anekal Taluk, Bangalore Urban District. (By Sri K.V.Sathish & Associates, Advocates) Vs. 2 Crl.Appeal No.395/2013 Respondent : Smt. Ashwathamma, Original accused W/o. Muninarayanappa, Aged about 48 years, R/a. No.137, Ground Floor, 10th Main, Opp, Water Tank, AECS Layout, Kudlu, Bangalore - 560 068. (By Sri J.M. Ravikumar, Advocate) JUDGMENT This is an appeal preferred by the appellant/original complainant against the respondent/original accused U/Sec.372 of Cr.P.C., against the impugned acquittal judgment passed by the XIII ACMM Court, Bengaluru, in it's CC No.2921/2010, dated 29.06.2013. 2. The original complainant before the lower court having preferred the instant appeal against the original accused, as the appellant and the respondent, respectively, are hereby assigned with their original ranks before the lower court i.e., the appellant as the complainant and the respondent as the accused in the instant discussion for the purpose of brevity and convenience to avoid the confoundation and perplexity. 3. This is a criminal case at CC No.2921/2010 arising-out of the PCR No.29529/2009 filed by the complainant against the accused before the lower court seeking the relief of taking cognizance for the offence committed by the accused U/Sec.138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 and punish her by imposing the maximum fine and grant the compensation to the complainant towards the face-value of the cheque. 4. The epitomized facts projected from the complaint before the lower court run thus: In the instant case in hand, the complainant and the accused being known to each other for more than two years, the accused being approached the complainant in the second week of August 2008 for the hand-loan of Rs.60,000/- to meet her financial contingencies, the complainant lent Rs.60,000/-, for which the accused agreed to repay the same within six months there-from and later-on, the accused issued a cheque bearing No.908476, dated 29.06.2009, for Rs.60,000/-, drawn on State Bank of Mysore, HSR Layout Branch, Bengaluru. When the complainant presented the said cheque for the encashment before his bankers, it came to be dishonoured with a bank endorsement as "insufficient funds" on 12.10.2009. Therefore, the complainant was compelled to issue the legal notice to the accused, as against which the accused has replied evasively and not complied by repaying the cheque amount to the complainant. The accused being fully aware that, there is no sufficient amount in her account to honor the cheque bearing No.908476 towards the legally enforceable debt, has committed the offence punishable U/Sec.138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. 5. After lodging the complaint, the lower court has taken the cognizance in exercise of the powers conferred- upon it U/Sec.190(a) & (c) of Cr.P.C. against the instant accused for the offence punishable U/Sec.138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. 6. After recording the sworn statement of the instant complainant, the process U/Sec.204 of Cr.P.C. having been issued, the accused has put-in her appearance before the lower court in response to the summons issued against her, through her learned counsel. 7. On moving for bail, the accused has been released on bail. 8. The lower court has framed the substance of accusation for the offence punishable U/Sec.138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, and the same was read over and explained to the accused in the vernacular best known to her. 9. The accused has denied the same and pleaded not guilty and further claimed to be tried. 10. In order to prove the guilt against the accused, the complainant has got adduced the evidence of himself alone as P.W.1 and placed his reliance on the documents marked at Exs.P.1 to P.8, in which Ex.P.1 is the original cheque; Ex.P.2 is the bank challen; Ex.P.3 is the bank endorsement; Ex.P.4 is the copy of the legal notice issued against the accused on 11.11.2009; Ex.P.5 is the RPAD receipt; Ex.P.6 is the UCP receipt; Ex.P.7 is the RPAD postal acknowledgement and Ex.P.8 is the complaint. 11. After the complainant's evidence was closed, in view of the incriminating circumstances arising-out of the evidence of the complainant's side witnesses, the statements of the accused under the provisions of Section 313 of Cr.P.C. were recorded. 12. To rebut the case and the evidence of the complainant, the accused herself has got examined as DW.2 and further got examined an independent witness as DW.1 and thereby DW.2 herself has placed the reliance on the documents marked at Exs.D.1 & D.2, in which Ex.D.1 is the copy of the reply notice as against Ex.P.4 and Ex.D.2 is the Xerox copy of the reply notice issued to the notice of Sri Shekar Reddy by Sri Muninarayanappa S/o Madappa. 13. The lower court having heard the arguments advanced by both the learned counsel for the complainant as well as the learned counsel for the accused, basing on the material available on record from the complainant, the lower court has framed the points for it's consideration as under: (1) Whether the complainant proves that the accused had issued cheque bearing No.908476 for Rs.60,000/- dated 29.06.2009 towards the discharge of legally enforceable debt due to him and on presentation of the said cheque, it came to be dishonored for insufficient funds and thereby the accused has committed an offence punishable U/Sec.138 N.I.Act? (2) What order? 14. The lower court has given the findings on the points for consideration raised by it, as under: (1) Point No.1 .. In the Negative. (2) Point No.2 .. As per final order, for the following: -------- and thereby acquitted the accused. 15. Being aggrieved by the impugned acquittal judgment passed by the lower court, the appellant/original complainant before the lower court, has preferred the instant appeal against the respondent/original accused before the lower court, on the following: GROUNDS OF APPEAL (a) The lower court has not appreciated the evidence properly. (b) The lower court has wrongly based on the reply given by the accused to the notice of the complainant and wrongly arrived at a conclusion to acquit the accused. (c) The lower court has lost it's sight to take note-of that, the entire evidence adduced by the complainant prevails that, the possibility of issuance of cheque to the accused towards the discharge of her liability. (d) The lower court has lost it's sight to take note-of that, one cannot come to the conclusion that, without any relevant documents, the complainant is the owner of the finance-office, though the DW.1 has never stated regarding the same in his evidence. (e) The case pending before the XIII ACMM Court, Bengaluru, between DW.1 and one Muninarayanappa who is the husband of the instant accused cannot be considered to say that, the cheque in question is issued as a security while borrowing the loan from DW.1 by him. (f) The lower court has wrongly held that, the accused has proved her defence that, the cheque in question has been given by her husband to DW.1 while borrowing the amount. (g) Mere the depositions of DWs.1 & 2 without producing the relevant material to depict the cheque in question was given by her husband will not suffice to arrive at a conclusion to acquit the accused. (h) The lower court has lost it's sight to consider that, once the cheque is admitted to be belonging to the accused, knowing of reading and writing the English language would not come to the rescue her. (i) The lower court has wrongly accepted the evidence of the DW.2/accused though the material contradictions between the evidence of DWs.1 & 2 were pointed-out by the complainant's side. (j) The lower court has failed to take note-of the fact in connection with the relationship between the complainant and the accused. (k) The lower court has wrongly arrived at a conclusion that, the cheque in question issued to DW.1 by the husband of the accused with regard to the transaction between them in the light of the CC No.36285/2010 which came to be filed against the husband of the instant accused through one counsel by name Sri Sathish. But the lower court has lost it's sight to take note-of that, a practicing counsel can merely represent his client out of his own choice as per the instructions before any court. (l) The lower court has lost it's sight to take note-of the admission given by DW.2 that, the cheque in question belongs to her and it was given by her personally as a security for the loan taken by her husband. (m) The lower court has lost it's sight to take note-of that, there is no single document on record to depict the cheque in question is issued to Shekar Reddy who has not given any acknowledgement nor endorsement for having received the said cheque for the purpose of security for the loan to the husband of the instant accused. Hence, prayed for allowing the instant appeal. 16. Per contra, the respondent/accused has not filed any counter-objections to the instant appeal memo. 17. I have heard the arguments of both the learned counsels for the appellant/complainant as well as the respondent/accused. 18. Basing on the material available on record and grounds of appeal, the points that arise for my consideration are: (1) Whether the lower court has justified in negating the Point No.1 raised by it for it's consideration holding that, the complainant has failed to prove that the accused had borrowed the hand-loan of Rs.60,000/- from him, in respect of which the accused had issued a cheque as per Ex.P.1 in discharge of the said debt which came to be dishonored and even after service of statutory notice to the accused, she has failed to repay the said hand-loan amount and thereby she is found not guilty of the offence punishable U/Sec.138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881? (2) Whether the judgment of the lower court is arbitrary, baseless, capricious, devoid of merits, erroneous, frivolous and perverse without being on the sound principles of law and warrants for the interference by the instant court? (3) To what order? 19. My findings on the above points are as under: Point No.1 .. In the Affirmative. Point No.2 .. In the Negative. Point No.3 .. As per the final order, for the following: REASONS 20. The status and ranking assigned in the lower court to the complainant and accused are being adopted and adhered-to in the instant discussion for the purpose of brevity and convenience to avoid the confoundation and perplexity. 21. Point No's.1 & 2:- To avoid the reiteration of the material available in hand and to appreciate the evidence adduced before the lower court, in a better position, I hereby take-up the instant Point No's.1 & 2 together admixingly for discussion. 22. It is the specific contention of the complainant by way of his complaint that, in the instant case in hand, the complainant and the accused being known to each other for more than two years, the accused being approached the complainant in the second week of August 2008 for the hand-loan of Rs.60,000/- to meet her financial contingencies, the complainant lent Rs.60,000/-, for which the accused agreed to repay the same within six months there-from and later-on, the accused issued a cheque bearing No.908476, dated 29.06.2009, for Rs.60,000/-, drawn on State Bank of Mysore, HSR Layout Branch, Bengaluru. When the complainant presented the said cheque for the encashment before his bankers, it came to be dishonoured with a bank endorsement as "insufficient funds" on 12.10.2009. Therefore, the complainant was compelled to issue the legal notice to the accused, as against which the accused has replied evasively and not complied by repaying the cheque amount to the complainant. The accused being fully aware that, there is no sufficient amount in her account to honor the cheque bearing No.908476 towards the legally enforceable debt, has committed the offence punishable U/Sec.138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. 23. To substantiate his contentions, the complainant has got adduced the evidence of himself alone as P.W.1 and placed his reliance on the documents marked at Exs.P.1 to P.8, in which Ex.P.1 is the original cheque; Ex.P.2 is the bank challen; Ex.P.3 is the bank endorsement; Ex.P.4 is the copy of the legal notice issued against the accused on 11.11.2009; Ex.P.5 is the RPAD receipt; Ex.P.6 is the UCP receipt; Ex.P.7 is the RPAD postal acknowledgement and Ex.P.8 is the complaint. 24. Denying the entire case of the complainant, it is the specific defence of the accused that, she does not know reading and writing the English language except putting her signature in the Kannada language, and the complainant was working under one Shekar Reddy who is running the finance business, is well-acquainted with her husband, and her husband had raised the hand-loan from the said Shekar Reddy, towards which the accused had issued a blank-cheque in discharge of the said loan borrowed from Shekar Reddy by her husband. But, the said Shekar Reddy has misused the said blank-cheque which was issued by the instant accused as towards the security, and thereby the instant complainant has got created the said cheque in-collusion with the Shekar Reddy by writing the said contents of the said cheque as per his whims and fancies. There is no any transaction between herself and the complainant and at no point of time, either she has borrowed the loan of Rs.60,000/- from the complainant or she has issued any cheque in favour of the complainant. Hence, prayed for dismissing the instant appeal. 25. At the very outset, on meticulous consideration of the rival contentions of both the sides, along-with their respective oral and documentary evidence meticulously, it is clear that, there is no dispute in so-far-as the said cheque which is marked as per Ex.P.1 belongs to the instant accused, along-with her signature, thereon. But, the only point in dispute is that, it was issued as a blank-cheque not to the instant complainant but to one Shekar Reddy, towards the security in connection with the hand-loan transaction made by her husband with the said Shekar Reddy. 26. In view of that matter, it is incumbent-upon this court to look-into as to whether the complainant has established the prima-facie case that, the accused had raised the hand-loan of Rs.60,000/- from him and in discharge of the same, the accused had issued the said cheque as per Ex.P.1. 27. It is pertinent to note that, though the complainant himself has got examined as P.W.1, he has clearly stated in his cross-examination by the learned counsel for the accused that, he has not obtained any contemporary document as an endorsement for having advanced the alleged loan of Rs.60,000/- to the accused and also he had no any hurdle to obtain such contemporary documentary endorsement. It is also further stated by P.W.1 that, he has no any documentary evidence to show that, he was having Rs.60,000/- at the time of the alleged transaction. By virtue of these particular fatal versions of the P.W.1, it certainly goes to the very root of his case and also the legal aspect because, it is a well-settled principle of precedent law, reported in 2010(2) Kar.L.J. 284 in a case between B. Girish vs. S. Ramaiah, which reads thus: "NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881, Section 138-Dishonour of cheque - Trial Court acquitted accused/respondent for offence punishable under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act - Complainant has presented this appeal on grant of special leave - Presumption under Section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act would not extend as to existence of debt or other liability as observed by Supreme Court in Krishna Janardhan Bhat v. Dattatreya G. Hegde, 2008(6) Kar. L.J. 538 (SC) - Presumption under Section 118(a) of the Negotiable Instruments Act is rebuttable - Defence of accused that cheque was not issued for discharge of any debt or liability - Admittedly accused had no financial capacity to pay Rs.50,000/- nor he had any savings - No contemporary documents have come into existence - Absence of any such documentary evidence would create great amount of doubt about genuineness of transaction - Section 269-SS of the Income Tax Act, 1961 insists that all transactions involving Rs.20,000/- and above should be through 'account payee cheque' - Defence of accused is highly probable and that accused has rebutted presumption under Section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act - Trial Court justified in acquitting accused - Appeal dismissed. K.N.Keshavanarayana, J., Held: No doubt, under Section 139 of the N.I.Act, the presumption is required to be drawn that the holder of the cheque has received the same for discharge of any debt or other liability. As held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Krishna Janardhan Bhat v Dattatraya G. Hegde, 2008(6) Kar. L.J. 538 (SC), the presumption under Section 139 of the N.I.Act would not extend as to the existence of debt or other liability. Of course, as per clause(a) of Section 118 of the N.I.Act, it has to be presumed that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration, and that every such instrument when it has been accepted, endorsed, negotiated or transferred was accepted endorsed, negotiated or transferred for consideration and as per clause (b) it shall be presumed that every negotiable instrument bearing a date was made or drawn on such date. Both these presumptions are rebuttable presumptions. As held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid decision, the question as to whether these presumptions have been rebutted or not have to be considered by looking into the entire material on record and it is not necessary for the accused to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubt nor be is required to step into the witness-box to prove his defence. In the case on hand, it is the specific defence of the accused that there was no monetary transaction between him and the complainant and that he has not received any loan from the complainant at any point of time and the cheque was not issued for discharge of any debt or liability. Admittedly, the accused had no financial capacity to pay Rs.50,000/- nor he had any savings. In the absence of any evidence placed by the complainant, it is highly difficult to believe that he had borrowed money from a Credit Co-operative Society and others for the purpose of lending the loan to the accused. In addition to this, except the cheque in question there is no other documentary evidence to show that the complainant had lent Rs.50,000/- to the accused and the accused acknowledged the receipt of the same. No contemporary documents have come into existence. When a substantial amount of Rs.50,000/- was lent, it is reasonable to expect that the creditor would insist on the debtor to execute some document evidencing such transaction. Absence of any such documentary evidence would create great amount of doubt about the genuineness of the transaction. Section 269(ss) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 insists that all transactions involving Rs.20,000/- and above, should be through 'account payee cheques'. All these circumstances, as rightly pointed out by the learned Magistrate are sufficient to hold that the defence of the accused is highly probable and that the accused has rebutted the presumption under Section 139 of the N.I.Act. (Para 7) 28. On meticulous perusal of this particular principle of law, it clearly emerges a principle that, whenever there is a substantial amount lent, it is reasonable to expect that the creditor would insist on the debtor to execute some document evidencing such transaction and in the absence of any such documentary evidence, it would create great amount of doubt about the genuineness of the transaction. 29. Similarly, in the instant case in hand, the complainant having taken the contention that, he had advanced the loan of Rs.60,000/- in favour of the accused, as he himself has clearly stated in the cross- examination, he has not obtained any contemporary document with respect to the hand-loan transaction alleged to have been made in the year 2008-09, in connection with the Ex.P.1 alleged disputed cheque. Therefore, in the absence of such substantial contemporary documentary evidence from the complainant's side, it is only vista left as a last resort to the instant court to suspect regard the very genuineness of the alleged transaction since it creates the great amount of doubt. 30. Further, the P.W.1 has denied the suggestions made by the learned counsel for the accused to the effect that, he (complainant) was working as Writer in the finance of one Shekar Reddy and he has further stated that, he does not know who is Shekar Reddy and also disclosed his ignorance and no knowledge of the suggested factum to him that, the said Shekar Reddy had secured a blank-cheque towards the security in connection with the hand-loan raised by the husband of the accused from Shekar Reddy, and also he has denied that, he is accompanying the said Shekar Reddy to come to the ACMM Court, in which the said Shekar Reddy has lodged the complaint against the husband of the instant accused in connection with the other loan transaction. It is also denied the suggestion specifically by the P.W.1 that, the accused has not raised any loan from him, at any point of time and also he (complainant) was not capable of advancing the loan and he has not given any Rs.60,000/- to the accused on 25.08.2008. Therefore, ultimately, the prima-facie absolute heavy burden lies on the complainant to establish that, he has advanced the loan of Rs.60,000/- in favour of the accused on 25.08.2008 and he was capable of advancing the same. Meaning-thereby, the source of income of the complainant is also required to be delved-into, to ascertain and determine as to whether he was capable of advancing the said loan of Rs.60,000/- to the accused. 31. It is significant to note that, in the cross- examination, the P.W.1 has stated that, he is doing the tailor work in his house. But, as per the defence of the accused, the complainant is working as a Writer in the finance business of one Shekar Reddy who has been got examined by the accused, as DW.1. Thereby, the said DW.1 has clearly stated that, he has no any familiarity with the instant complainant and also denied that, the instant complainant is working in his finance business institution, wherefore, the learned counsel for the accused has treated the said DW.1 as hostile witness by invoking the provisions of Section 154 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 with the permission of the said ACMM lower court and cross-examined him and thereby extracted and elicited the admission through the mouth of DW.1 to the effect that, he has filed the CC No.36285/2010 against the husband of the instant accused and the notice in the said case was issued to the husband of the instant accused in connection with the said transaction with him through his learned counsel Sri Sathish, but he has denied the suggestion that, the said instant Ex.P.1/cheque was obtained by the DW.1, towards the security in dischargence of the said loan amount which was used by the husband of the accused, from him. 32. On overall consideration of these particular versions of the DW.1 coupled-with the very versions of the P.W.1, it is clear that, though the P.W.1 has denied that, he is the employee under the said DW.1, the learned counsel for the instant complainant who is none other than Sri Sathish himself is the advocate for the said DW.1 in connection with the CC No.36285/2010 pertaining to the alleged loan transaction between the instant DW.1 and the husband of the instant accused. Meaning-thereby, it is clear that the advocate by name Sri Sathish is a common advocate to both the instant complainant as well as the DW.1, in their respective cases. 33. It is the specific allegation of the accused that, the said instant Ex.P.1/cheque has been misused by the complainant in-collusion with the instant DW.1. There is some force prevailing in the said contention taken by the accused in respect of likelihood-ness of misusing the said cheque stated to have been issued by the instant accused towards the security in connection with the loan raised by her husband from the instant DW.1. This particular aspect cannot be ignored or overlooked at-an-ease unless the substantial chunk of material is placed on record and established by the complainant in favour of his case, over-riding the said allegation and defence endeavored to put-forth by the accused. 34. It is also significant to note that, as stated by the P.W.1 in his cross-examination, he has no any documentary evidence to establish that, he was capable of paying and advancing the loan to the accused. The said alleged Rs.60,000/- is not a meager amount as per the said principle of law, as discussed herein before supra; Whereas, it is a substantial sum of amount, in respect of which, in the ordinary course, it is expected from the complainant to make-out and establish regarding his source of income to advance Rs.60,000/- as the hand-loan to the complainant. But, unfortunately, the complainant/P.W.1 has failed in establishing the same, prima-faciely. 35. It is further stated by the P.W.1 himself in the cross-examination that, the said Ex.P.1/cheque has been returned by the accused herself and thereafter given to him. But, again at the later-stage of his cross- examination, when he was suggested by the learned counsel for the accused that, the accused is unknown with the English writing, the P.W.1 has retracted his earlier version and stated in the fashion of improvement, to the effect that, the accused herself has got returned the said Ex.P.1/cheque and given to him. 36. On meticulous consideration of these two different versions of the P.W.1, it clearly goes to indicate that, the complainant himself is not firm with his own stand in respect of writings of the said cheque as per Ex.P.1. Apart from the same, by virtue of the response of the P.W.1 in his cross-examination in the fluctuating fashion in a dubious manner, it creates the substantial amount of doubt leading to arrive at a conclusion that, the said alleged transaction, along-with the alleged Ex.P.1/cheque are absolutely shrouded with the fatal suspicious circumstances which are essentially required to be cleared-of and establish his case by the complainant. But, no such substantial material is forthcoming from the complainant's side to over-ride and clear-of the said suspicious circumstances shrouded around his own case and the alleged Ex.P.1/cheque. 37. It is significant to note that, in so-far-as the writing of the said Ex.P.1/cheque is concerned, the D.W.2 who is none other than the accused person, has clearly stated that, she does not know the English language. In view of that matter, on meticulous consideration of the said contents of the Ex.P.1/cheque, it is clear on the face of the record itself that, the admitted signature of the DW.2/accused, is in Kannada language; Whereas, the other contents are in English language. Therefore, the contention taken by the complainant that, the said Ex.P.1/cheque was issued either by the DW.2 or later-on, his changed version that, the accused has got written the said Ex.P.1/cheque and handed-over to him, certainly stands under the suspicious circumstances creating the fatal doubts in the mind of this court. 38. Apart from the same, the accused/DW.2 having specifically taken the defence that, she had issued the blank-cheque in favour of the DW.1/Shekar Reddy who has clearly stated that, he is well-known to his counsel since last ten years, and there is no any nexus between the instant accused as well as the complainant in respect of the alleged loan transaction which is in dispute. 39. Therefore, under these peculiar circumstances, it is clear that, the entire case of the complainant itself being prevailing under the major suspicious circumstances prima-faciely, the question of adhering the presumptions U/Secs.118 & 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, to the very case of the complainant, along-with the Ex.P.1, does-not arise at-all. When that is so, the question of rebutting the contrary as against the case of the complainant, by the instant accused, also does-not arise at-all. But, however, the accused/DW.2 having made-out specifically regarding her own defence on the face of record prima-faciely, certainly it prevails over the case of the complainant, dominantly creating the absolute suspicion regarding the genuineness of the complainant's case. 40. It is also significant to note that, the lower court has discussed at much-length in it's judgment and appreciated the evidence in the right perspective by relying on the cardinal principles laid-down by the various Hon'ble High Courts and the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, citation reported in 2010(1) Kar.L.J. 197 in a case between Shrimathi Vs. Renuka; citation reported in 2003 Crl. L.J. 411 in a case between C. Antony Vs. K.G. Raghavan Nair; citation reported in 2008 AIR SCW 738 in a case between Krishna Janardhan Bhat Vs. Dattatraya G. Hegde; citation reported in ILR 2008 Kar. 4629 in a case between Shiva Murthy Vs. Amruthraj, in the right perspective, wherefore, it is clear that, there is no substantiality in the case of the complainant to convict the accused. 41. Therefore, under all these circumstances, to put-into simple terms, the complainant having utterly failed to establish the guilt against the accused U/Sec.138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, in respect of which the lower court has discussed at much- length in it's judgment at Para No's.9 to 21 in the right perspective on the sound principles of law without there being any kind of infirmities and illegalities, in respect of which the instant court also being in agreement of the same, the lower court's acquittal judgment does not deserve for warranting the interference by the instant court. 42. With these observations, I am inclined to answer the Point No.1 in the 'Affirmative' and Point No.2 in the 'Negative'. 43. Point No.3:- For the reasons discussed at much-length herein before supra, while answering Point No.1 in the Affirmative and Point No.2 in the Negative, I am inclined to proceed to pass the following: O R D E R The instant criminal appeal preferred by the appellant/original complainant against the respondent/original accused U/Sec.372 of Cr.P.C., against the impugned acquittal judgment passed by the XIII ACMM Court, Bengaluru, in CC No.2921/2010, dated 29.06.2013, is hereby dismissed by upholding and confirming the lower court judgment. Send the entire LCRs to the lower court, along-with the copy the instant judgment immediately, without causing any delay. (Dictated to the Judgment Writer, transcribed and typed by him and after corrections, printout taken and then pronounced and signed by me in the open Court, on this the 21st day of October, 2015) (G.D.Mahavarkar) LI Addl.City Civil & Sessions Judge, Bangalore City. (Orders pronounced in the open court. Operative portion of the same is extracted as under) ORDER The instant criminal appeal preferred by the appellant/original complainant against the respondent/original accused U/Sec.372 of Cr.P.C., against the impugned acquittal judgment passed by the XIII ACMM Court, Bengaluru, in CC No.2921/2010, dated 29.06.2013, is hereby dismissed by upholding and confirming the lower court judgment. Send the entire LCRs to the lower court, along-with the copy the instant judgment immediately, without causing any delay. (G.D.Mahavarkar) LI Addl.City Civil & Sessions Judge, Bangalore City.
