DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG110

TITLE: Archana vs . Jagmohan on 4 March, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/130371633/



DOMAIN: Criminal Law

SUBDOMAIN: Criminal Justice

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, archana, jagmohan, march, financial, criminal law

CONTENT:

-:1:- IN THE COURT OF MS. MANU VEDWAN, LD. METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE : SPECIAL COURT - 05 (NI ACT) : DWARKA : DELHI Archana Vs. Jagmohan Complaint Case No. : 201/14 P.S. : Palam Village U/s. : 138 N.I.Act J U D G M E N T 1. Name of the complainant : Archana 2. Name of the accused and address : Jagmohan Singh S/o late Sh. Sardar Buta Singh R/o WZ­27, Hind Nagar, Tilak Nagar, New Delhi 3. Offence complained of : U/s.138 N.I.Act 4. Plea of accused : Pleaded not guilty 5. Final Order : Acquitted 6. Date of Reserving the : 26.02.2014 Judgment 7. Date of Order : 04.03.2014 Date of Institution of case : 01.05.2013 Date of Decision of the case : 04.03.2014 BRIEF SKETCH OF THE CASE CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan 1. Vide this judgment, I shall dispose of the complaint u/s.138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 against the accused. 2. It is submitted in the complaint that when complainant along with her husband was living in a house near Palam they came in contact with the accused. Accused himself told the complainant, that he would get the house loan arranged for the complainant. It is further submitted in the complaint that accused then took a sum of Rupees One lacs fifty thousand from the complainant in lieu of the paper work to be done with respect to the loan. But, accused was not able to arrange the loan and therefore agreed to return the above mentioned amount to the complainant. Thus, accused in discharge of his liability towards the complainant issued a cheque bearing No. 476897 dated 12.03.2013 of the amount of Rs. 1, 50,000/­ drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank, New Delhi­18. 3. It is further submitted that on presentation of the aforesaid cheque, same was dishonoured for the reasons "Funds insufficient" vide returning memo dated 13.03.2013. Legal notice was sent to the accused through counsel for the complainant on 10.04.2013 demanding the cheque amount. The same was duly served upon the accused. Through, that notice accused was requested to pay the amount of the cheque within fifteen days from the receipt of the CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan same, failing which accused was also notified that necessary action under Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 would be taken against him. But, in spite of all, the efforts taken by the complainant accused failed to clear the outstanding or to pay the total amount of the cheque in question. 4. Present complaint has been filed by the complainant against the accused u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act through the complainant. The complaint was filed within limitation on 01.05.2013 pursuant to which summons were issued against the accused, consequent, thereupon the accused entered appearance on 18.07.2013 and was admitted to bail. Notice u/s. 251 CrPC was framed on 20.09.2013 against the accused to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 5. Thereafter, the matter was listed for evidence. Complainant has been examined in post­summoning evidence as CW1. CW1 adopted her affidavit Ex.CW1/1 tendered at the stage of pre­summoning evidence. CW1 has relied upon following documents already tendered and exhibited on record: Cheque bearing No. 476797 dated 12.03.2013 ie. cheque in question is Ex.CW1/A, Returning memo dated 13.03.2013 is Ex.CW1/B, Legal notice dated 10.04.2013 is Ex. CW1/C, Postal receipt is Ex. CW1/D, Courier receipt is Ex. CW1/E and acknowledgment card is Ex. CW1/F. Complaint is exhibited as CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan Ex. CW1/Z. CW1 was cross examined at length by the counsel for the accused. 6. Complainant also got examined Sh. Ashish Arora, Branch Manager, Muthoot Fincorp Ltd as CW2. CW 2 in his examination in chief deposed that the Loan Disbursement Copy dated 13.08.2012 for a sum of Rs. 94, 500/­ has been brought by him and same is Ex. CW2/1(OSR). Loan Disbursement Copy dated 31.10.2013 for a sum of Rs. 79, 000/­ has already been exhibited as Ex. CW1/D1. CW 2 deposed that above said loan was availed by the complainant. CW 2 was cross­examined at length by the counsel for the accused. 7. Statement of accused u/s.313 CrPC recorded on 10.01.2014. Accused in his statement denied of receiving an amount of Rs. 1, 50,000/­ from the complainant in the lieu of the paper work for arranging the loan from the Bank. Accused further stated in his statement that the cheque in question was given as blank after signing the same for security purpose as complainant was working with him in respect of arranging the loan to their customers. Accused denied of receiving any legal notice from the complainant. Accused also denied of owing any liability towards the complainant. 8. Accused led his defence evidence and get himself examined as DW 1. DW 1 in his examination in chief deposed that he had taken the CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan loan of Rs. 35,000/­ from Mr. Anil for getting the loan sanctioned on the property bearing No. 212B, Raj Nagar, Palam Colony, New Delhi. DW 1 further deposed that he had kept the cheque in question with himself to hand it over to Mr Anil as security to the abovesaid amount. DW 1 thereafter, in his examination in chief deposed that he was not aware when complainant had taken the cheque in question from his office meant for Mr. Anil. DW 1 accepted the fact of knowing the complainant as complainant used to work with him for getting the loan sanctioned for various customers. DW 1 also relied upon the documents named agreement dated 22.09.2013 which is marked as mark A. 9. Accused in the course of leading his defence evidence, also got examined Sh Anil Kumar as DW 2. DW 2 in his examination in chief deposed that complainant approached him for purchasing the flat for the amount of Rs. 19 lacs. DW 2 further deposed that complainant paid an amount of Rs. 80,000/­ to him and requested him to arrange a loan for the remaining amount. Thus, DW 2 introduced her to Mr. Jagmohan for the purpose of getting the loan sanctioned. Jagmohan(present accused) demanded an amount of Rs. 35,000/­ for getting the loan executed in favour of the complainant. DW 2 further deposed that he gave an amount of Rs. 35,000/­ to the accused and took a blank signed cheque from him as security. The fact that husband of the complainant is Non CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan Resident Indian and thus complainant is incapable of availing loan facility, came to the knowledge of the accused lateron. Accused, thereafter, paid back the amount of Rs. 35,000/­ to DW 2 and DW 2 gave his cheque back to him. DW 2 further deposed that lateron accused told him that the abovesaid cheque had got misplaced and court case has been filed against him. DW 2 also relied upon the agreement dated 22.09.2013 which is mark A. 10 Final arguments were advanced at length by Sh.Joginder Kumar, learned counsel for the complainant and Sh. Kuldeep Singh, learned counsel for the accused. 11 I have considered the rival submissions and perused the relevant records carefully. I have also perused the judgement filed by the accused ie. 2008 Legal Eagle (SC) 55 delivered by Hon'ble Apex Court in case titled as 'Krishna Janardhan Bhat Vs. Dattatraya G Hegde'. 12 Before adverting to the facts of case in hand it would be pertinent to reproduce the relevant provisions of Section 138, 139 and Section 118(a) of Negotiable Instruments Act at the very outset, which reads as follows :­ Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act reads as follows: 138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan of funds in the account - Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for [a term which may be extended to two years], or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless­ (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, [within thirty days] of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation - For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability.] Section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act reads as follows: Presumption in favour of holder - It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that6 the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to in section 138 for discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan Section 118 of Negotiable Instruments Act reads as follows: Presumption as to negotiable instruments - Until the contrary is proved, the following presumptions shall be made:­ (a) of consideration - that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration, and that every such instrument, when it has been accepted, endorsed, negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for consideration; 13 Before, going into the interpretation of law, lets first analyse the fact in hand and contentions of parties. It is the case of the complainant that in lieu of paper work to be done in pursuance of passing the loan, accused took a sum of Rs. 1, 50,000/­ from her. Accused thereafter in discharge of his liability towards the complainant issued the cheque in question. Counsel for the complainant at the time of the arguments also contended the same fact that accused had taken the amount of Rs. 1,50,000/­ from the complainant for getting the loan sanctioned. Counsel for the complainant has also argued that complainant has also examined witness Sh.Ashish Arora regarding the fact of the availability of the funds with the complainant. Per Contra, counsel for the accused submits that cheque in question was misplaced CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan and further, submits that even if this ground is not considered, then also, no presumption can be raised in the favour of the complainant as there is no consideration in the eyes of law, required to raise the presumptions, in the favour of the complainant under the Negotiable Instruments Act. Counsel for the accused also argued the validity of consideration in light of Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act. Counsel for the accused submits that complainant fails to produce any document except the cheque in question to press the fact of liability of accused. While the counsel for complainant rebutted the views of the counsel for the accused on the ground that there is no such requirement in the light of the presumption U/s 118(a) and Section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act. 14 A mandatory presumption is required to be raised in terms of Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the Act. Section 138 of the Act has three ingredients viz.: a)that there is a legally enforceable debt, b) that the cheque was drawn from the account of the bank for discharge in whole or in part of any debt or other liability which pre supposes a legally enforceable debt and c) that the cheque so issued had been returned due to insufficiency of funds. Presumptions both under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the Act are rebuttable in nature. Hon'ble Supreme Court in UOI Vs. Pramod Gupta by LRs and Ors. (2205) 12 SCC 1 has dealt with the expressions 'May presume', 'shall presume' and conclusive proof. "..............The meaning of expressions "may presume" and "shall presume" have been explained in Section 4 of the Evidence CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan Act, 1872, from a perusal whereof it would be evident that whenever it is directed that court shall presume a fact it shall regard such fact as proved unless disproved. In terms of the said provision, thus, the expression "shall presume" cannot be held to be synonymous with "conclusive proof". The words 'until the contrary is proved' in Section 118 do not mean that accused must show that instrument is not supported by any form of consideration but accused has the option to ask the court to consider the non­ existence of consideration so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the case, to act upon the supposition that consideration did not exist. For the purpose of rebutting the initial evidentiary burden, the accused can rely on direct evidence or circumstantial evidence or on presumptions of law or fact. In Hiten P Dalal Vs. Bartindranath Banerjee(2001) 6 SCC 16) wherein this Court held: "22. Presumptions are rules of evidence and do not conflict with the presumption of innocence, because by the latter, all that is meant is that the prosecution is obliged to prove the case against the accused beyond reasonable doubt. The obligation on the prosecution may be discharged with the help of presumptions of law or fact unless the accused adduces evidence showing the reasonable possibility of the non­ existence of the presumed fact. CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan 23. In other words, provided the facts required to form the basis of a presumption of law exist, no discretion is left with the court but to draw the statutory conclusion, but this does not preclude the person against whom the presumption is drawn from rebutting it and proving the contrary. A fact is said to be proved when, "after considering the matters before it, the court either believes it to exist, or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition than it exists". Therefore, the rebuttal does not haver to be conclusively established but such evidence must be adduced before the court in support of the defence that the court must either believe the defence to exist or consider its existence to be reasonably probable, the standard of reasonability being that of the "prudent man". In M. S. Narayana Menon Alias Mani Vs. State of Kerela and Another(2006) 6 SCC 39), it was held that once the accused is found to discharge his initial burden, it shifts to the complainant. 15 The scope of presumptions u/s.118(a) and u/s.139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act is that once the signatures on the cheque are admitted by the drawer of the cheque, there arises a presumption in favour of the payee/holder in due course in terms of these Sections of Negotiable Instruments Act that the cheque has been issued for consideration and in discharge of legally CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan enforceable debt or liability. It is also well settled that (a) the presumption does not go to the extent of presuming the existence of debt and (b) the aforesaid presumption is rebuttable in nature (see Krishna Janardhan Bhatt vs. Pattatraya G.Hegde (SC)2008(1) RCR Criminal 695). Further, it is also well settled that for the rebuttal of the presumptions it is not necessary that the accused must step into the witness box but the presumptions can be rebutted either by cross examination of complainant's witness (see M.S.Narayana Manon vs. State of Kerala & Another AIR 2006 SC 3366 and Krishna Jnardhan Bhat vs. Dattatraya Hegde SC 2008(1) RCR Criminal 695) or even by raising presumptions of fact or law from the material available on record (see Kundan Lal Kala Ram vs. Custodian Evacuee Property, reported as AIR 1961 SC 1316). Standard of proof of rebuttal of presumptions by any person accused of an offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act is preponderance of probabilities and It is not at all necessary for the accused to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubts. Thus, whether the presumption has or has not been rebutted depends on the facts of each case to be analyzed in the light of aforesaid legal principles. 16 A statutory presumption has an evidentiary value. For CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan rebutting the presumption it is not imperative to step into the witness box. In cases where there are even the sling chances of false implication, the back ground fact along with the legal requirements must be taken into consideration. Complainant here miserably fails to prove the aspect of the consideration. In Bharat Barrek & Drum Manufacturing Company Vs. Amin Chand(1999) 3 SCC 35 albeit in a civil case Hon'ble Supreme Court laid down the law in following terms. "..........The defendant can prove the non­existence of a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the defendant is proved to have discharged the initial onus of proof showing that the existence of consideration was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the plaintiff who will be obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and upon it's failure to prove would disentitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instruments....... The court may not insist upon the defendant to disprove the existence of consideration by leading direct evidence as the existence of negative evidence is neither possible nor contemplated and even if led, is to seen with a doubt." In Builders vs Arihant Fertilizers & Chemicals and Anr., (2008) 2 SCC 321, Negotiable Instruments Act envisages that: "...application of the penal provisions which needs to be construed strictly. Therefore, even if CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan two view in the matter are possible, the Court should lean in favour of the view which is beneficial to the accused. This is more so, when such a view will also advance the legislative intent, behind enactment of this criminal liability." Section 139 NI Act is an example of reverse onus clause as observed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rangrappu vs. Sri Mohan 2010 3 MLJ(Cri) 547(SC). In the absence of compelling justifications, reverse onus clauses usually impose an evidentiary burden and not a persuasive burden. Therefore, if the accused is able to raise a probable defence which creates doubts about the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution can fail. It is conceivable that in some case accused may not adduce evidence of his own and accused can rely upon the material submitted by the complainant to discharge his burden and thereby raise his defence. In the present case, complainant keeps on reiterating the fact that accused took the loan from her in lieu of paper work to be done for getting the loan passed. Though, even after amply raised by the accused on each stage of the case, the complainant miserably fails to establish the aspect of consideration with respect to cheque in question. The burden was on the accused to disprove the presumption u/s.139 NI Act, a burden which in the light of CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan above mentioned discussion has been successfully discharged by him. It is apparent that the accused has furnished cogent reasons which resulted in shifting the burden of proof on the complainant, which the latter failed to discharge. 17 Regarding the question that whether legal notice has been received by the accused? Complainant has placed on record legal notice Ex.CW1/C alongwith postal receipt Ex.CW1/D. It is a settled position of law that a notice properly addressed, prepaid and posted by registered post shall be deemed to be served upon the respondent unless the contrary is proved. Furthermore, it is not in dispute that accused has been served through process of the court and once it is so, the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Alavi Hazi v. Palapetty Muhammad & Anr. 2007 STPL (DC) 952 SC would also be applicable wherein Hon'ble Apex Court has held that even if the accused did not receive the legal demand notice he can pay the cheque amount within fifteen days of the service of summons from the court but if he fails, he cannot contend that he has not received the legal demand notice. 18 It is evident that the drawer has failed to make the payment of cheque amount in question within 15 days of the receipt of aforesaid notice, thus, the present complaint U/s 138 NI Act has been initiated against the accused. CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan 19 In the view of the foregoing observation and in view of the evidence, documents put forth and arguments of both the parties, the accused is hereby acquitted for the offence punishable u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act. Announced in the open court On this 4th day of March, 2014 (Manu Vedwan) MM/Special Court( 05) Dwarka Court/New Delhi CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan CC no 201/14 Archana Vs. Jagmohan
