DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG141

TITLE: In Re: vs Unknown on 14 October, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/13292196/



DOMAIN: Tax and Revenue Law

SUBDOMAIN: Income Tax and Revenue

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, unknown, october, financial, tax and revenue law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SH. ASHU GARG, Judge, Small Causes Court -cum- Addl. Senior Civil Judge -cum- Guardian Judge -cum- Metropolitan Magistrate (New Delhi), Patiala House Courts, New Delhi CC No. 102/13 Unique Case ID No. Date of Institution: 20.04.2004 [OLDEST] Date of reserving judgement: 20.09.2014 Date of pronouncement: 14.10.2014 In re: Commissioner of Customs ICD, TKD, New Delhi ... Complainant versus A-1) M/s. Lokesh Garments Pvt. Ltd. 315, FIE Patparganj Industrial Area, Delhi A-2) Sh. Lokesh Chand Chopra Director, M/s. Lokesh Garments Pvt. Ltd. 315, FIE Patparganj Industrial Area, Delhi ... Accused persons JUDGMENT: 1.The present complaint under section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (NI Act) has been filed by the complainant with respect to dishonour of a cheque no. 764474 dated 15.12.2003, for a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs, drawn on Punjab National Bank, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi, in favour of the complainant Commissioner of Custom (Export) by the the accused no. 2 Lokesh Chand Chopra, <span class="hidden_text" id="span_1">CC No. 102/13 Page 1 of 15</span> Director of the accused no. 1 company M/s. Lokesh Garments Pvt. Ltd. The cheque got dishonoured due to insufficiency of funds vide memo dated 07.02.2004. 2.The initial complaint was filed against seven accused persons but the court had summoned only the accused no. 1 company and its Director accused no. 2 (signatory). As per the complaint, the accused no. 2 was controlling the day to day business and activities of the accused no. 1 company as well as of proprietorship concerns accused no. 4 to 7 (sic: 3 to 7) namely M/s. Puja Hi Fashion, M/s. Kapil Impex and M/s. Chopco Fashion. Accused no. 3 and 4 were also stated to be the Directors of the accused no. 1 company. It had been alleged that the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) had been investigating into the exports of ready-made garments made by the accused persons and during the course of investigation, it observed that the said company and business concerns had availed undue duty drawback / export benefits in respect of the goods whose sale proceeds had not been realized within the stipulated period. As per the investigations, the said company and concerns had availed undue duty drawback / export benefits fraudulently to the tune of Rs. 2,51,06,277/- in aggregate. This fact was admitted by the accused no. 2 in his voluntary statement dated 15.10.2003 tendered under section 108 of the Customs Act, 1962. It is informed that the accused no. 2 had voluntarily tendered six cheques (including the cheque in question) worth Rs. 2.5 crores for repayment of wrongly availed drawback and export benefits. The accused no. 2 and 3 further undertook that they would produce drafts <span class="hidden_text" id="span_2">CC No. 102/13 Page 2 of 15</span> in lieu of the said cheques and if they failed to do so, then the cheques may be presented to the bank for encashment. When the accused persons failed to tender the drafts despite lapse of three months, the complainant presented the cheques for encashment. However, the cheque in question was returned dishonoured with the remarks "insufficient funds" vide memo dated 07.02.2004. Legal notice dated 05.03.2004 was sent to the accused persons but despite service, no payment was made, though a reply dated 16.03.2004 was given. Hence, the present complaint was filed in the court. 3.Pre-summoning evidence was lead and the accused no. 1 and 2 only were summoned by the court vide detailed order dated 29.04.2004. The accused no. 1 company never participated at the trial and notice of accusation under section 251 CrPC for the offence punishable under section 138 NI Act was framed against the accused no. 2 vide order dated 05.07.2005. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 4.At the trial, the complainant examined three witnesses in its support. CW-1 Sh. Yashpal, CW-2 Sh. Balram, and CW-4 Sh. Ravinder Nath were examined (it is to be noted that no CW-3 was examined by the complainant and the witnesses have been numbered incorrectly). 5.CW-1 Sh. Yashpal, Superintendent, Customs, tendered his affidavit and reiterated the contents of his complaint filed in discharge of his official duties. He proved on record the original cheque, the cheque return memo, legal notice, postal receipts as well as the photocopy of <span class="hidden_text" id="span_3">CC No. 102/13 Page 3 of 15</span> the statement of accused no. 2 made under Section 108 of the Customs Act. He was duly cross-examined by the Ld. Defence Counsel wherein he admitted that no authorization in his favour has been filed on record. He accepted that the cheque was not handed over to him. He had no personal knowledge of the matter and did not know if there were any dues against the accused on the day when the cheque was issued. He stated that he was deposing only on the basis of available record and had no personal knowledge of the facts of the case. 6.CW-2 Sh. Balram and CW-4 Sh. Ravinder Nath were bank officials from Punjab National Bank, Barahkhamba Road, New Delhi and Punjab National Bank, IG Airport, New Delhi, respectively, who produced the summoned bank records and registers pertaining to the cheque in question. 7.Statement of the accused no. 2 was recorded under section 313 CrPC on 07.12.2012, wherein he denied the averments and pleaded innocence. He claimed that the statement of under section 108 of the Customs Act was taken under threat and force and that he never issued the cheques voluntarily. He took stands that the officials of the complainant had detained him and took his signatures forcibly and claimed that he had no liability against the cheque in question. No evidence in defence was however led by the accused. 8.It is in these circumstance, that the Ld. Counsel for complainant has argued that the complainant had been able to prove its case against the <span class="hidden_text" id="span_4">CC No. 102/13 Page 4 of 15</span> accused persons. Ld. Counsel has relied upon the testimony of CWs together with the statement of the accused made under section 108 of the Customs Act, coupled with the presumption of law in its favour. It is submitted that such statement of the accused under section 108 of the Customs Act is admissible in evidence and taking into account the presumptions in favour of the complainant, the burden would shift upon to the accused to establish otherwise. It is argued that the accused has failed to establish any defence in his favour and has failed to lead any evidence in defence. 9.On the other hand, the Ld. Defence Counsel has filed written submissions and has contended that no case is made out against the accused. It is submitted that there is no authorization in favour of the witnesses to depose on behalf of the complainant and that no liability to the tune of the cheque amount has been proved on record. It is submitted that the accused is not required to step into the witness box to rebut the presumptions and he can point out the infirmities in the evidence of the complainant to rebut the same. It is submitted that the cheque taken from the accused under force and threat would not be covered under the offence punishable under section 138 NI Act. 10.I have heard the arguments advanced by both the sides and have carefully perused the material available on record. 11.The law with respect to offences punishable under section 138 of the Act is well settled. The law has been laid down by the Hon'ble <span class="hidden_text" id="span_5">CC No. 102/13 Page 5 of 15</span> Supreme Court of India, in the precedent titled as M/s. Kumar Exports v. M/s. Sharma Carpets [2009(2) SCC 513], wherein it has been held that: "The accused in a trial under Section 138 of the Act has two options. He can either show that consideration and debt did not exist or that under the particular circumstances of the case the non-existence of consideration and debt is so probable that a prudent man ought to suppose that no consideration and debt existed. To rebut the statutory presumptions an accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The accused may adduce direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be discharged by him. However, the court need not insist in every case that the accused should disprove the non-existence of consideration and debt by leading direct evidence because the existence of negative evidence is neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time, it is clear that bare denial of the passing of the consideration and existence of debt, apparently would not serve the purpose of the accused. Something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the complainant. To disprove the presumptions, the accused should bring on record such facts and circumstances, upon consideration of which, the court may either believe that the consideration and debt did not exist or their non-existence was so probable that a prudent <span class="hidden_text" id="span_6">CC No. 102/13 Page 6 of 15</span> man would under the circumstances of the case, act upon the plea that they did not exist. Apart from adducing direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not supported by consideration or that he had not incurred any debt or liability, the accused may also rely upon circumstantial evidence and if the circumstances so relied upon are compelling, the burden may likewise shift again on to the complainant. The accused may also rely upon presumptions of fact, for instance, those mentioned in Section 114 of the Evidence Act to rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The accused has also an option to prove the non-existence of consideration and debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the complainant's rescue". 12.Keeping these principles in mind, it is seen that the accused has not disputed the factum of the cheque in question to have been issued by him or bearing his signatures. He has never denied the fact that the <span class="hidden_text" id="span_7">CC No. 102/13 Page 7 of 15</span> cheque had been drawn on a bank account maintained by him with the Punjab National Bank, New Delhi. He has also not denied that the cheque was filled by him in favour of the complainant and for this particular amount, though he claims that the same was got filled by him under threat and force. It is not the defence of the accused that the cheque did not bears his signatures or that his signatures had been forged or that it was issued blank or was otherwise materially altered or modified. The genuineness of this cheque has not been disputed by him. 13.Similarly, the accused has not questioned the genuineness of the cheque returning memo or the factum of the dishonour of the cheque due to the reason as mentioned on this memo. It is not the case of the accused that the funds in his bank account were sufficient to honour this cheque. As such, it is clear that the cheque in question got dishonoured due to insufficiency of funds in his bank account. 14.The accused has never denied the receipt of the legal demand notice. He rather replied to that notice. He admitted receipt of the notice in his statement under section 313 CrPC. It is also not denied by the accused that he did not make the payment despite expiry of fifteen days from such service of legal demand notice. 15.Once these facts are proved, the court has to see if there existed a debt or other liability towards discharge of which the cheque in question might had been issued. 16.In this regard, the court has nothing material before it except the testimony of CW-1 Sh. Yashpal, as the CW-2 and CW-4 are only formal witnesses who had only produced the bank records. During his evidence, he admitted that the cheque was not given to him by the accused. It is apparent that the cheque had been received by the complainant through the DRI officials who had investigated into the alleged duty drawback / export benefits by the accused, his company and various other business concerns. Admittedly, he was not a witness to the circumstances under which the cheque had been issued by the accused. The DRI officials who had carried out the investigation and to whom the cheque had been given have not been examined by the complainant. And precisely on this ground that he was not a witness to such proceedings, CW-1 could not answer material questions as to the existence and extent of the liability of the accused when the cheque had been given. He categorically stated that he had no personal knowledge of the matter and was deposing only on the basis of records. Thus, he could not depose as to what was the liability assessed against the accused. There is nothing to show if any show cause notice had been issued by the complainant to the accused assessing his liability, though he claimed that a show cause notice had been issued and was adjudicated in the year 2007. Since he was not <span class="hidden_text" id="span_9">CC No. 102/13 Page 9 of 15</span> present at the time of handing over the cheque, he could not have admitted or denied if the cheque was obtained under threat or force. 17.In this position, it is clear that there is nothing on record to show that any such duty drawback / export benefits existed on the day when the cheque was issued by the accused. It is apparent that no such duty or benefit had been ever assessed by any department against the accused. There was no basis as to how the amount of Rs. 2,51,06,277/- was calculated or assessed as narrated in the complaint. It is well settled that for the purposes of offence under section 138 NI Act, the debt or liability has to be an existing liability and not future liability. The complainant has to show that a definite liability up to the cheque amount (or more than the amount) existed when the cheque had been issued. Mere oral submission of a witness, who was otherwise not concerned with the investigation, that the such amount was to be paid by the accused, would not be sufficient to establish that there existed a legally recoverable debt or liability. There are no records to show how this amount was arrived at. 18.Though there is no evidence lead by the accused to show that the cheque was obtained under any threat or force, yet it is clear that the material on record is not sufficient to ascertain the extent and existence of debt or liability against which the cheque might had been issued by him. Failure of the complainant to bring any evidence showing existence of legally recoverable debt or liability would make its case weak. There is nothing on record to show if any duty <span class="hidden_text" id="span_10">CC No. 102/13 Page 10 of 15</span> drawback / export benefits had been ever assessed by any department against which the cheque had been issued. If the cheque amount happens to be more than the assessed duty, no liability under section 138 NI Act can be fastened against the accused. Similarly, if the cheque was given towards discharge of duty that was yet to be assessed in future, no offence under section 138 NI Act would be made out in case of dishonour of such cheque. In such a case, the department would be entitled to proceed under the relevant laws against the accused, but as far as such cheque is concerned, it cannot be said to have been issued towards discharge of an existing debt or liability. 19.The statement under section 108 of the Customs Act, as being relied upon by the complainant, has never been proved as record as per law. Only a photocopy of the said statement was placed on record, the contents of which are also not completely legible. The original statement was never brought on record and the investigating officer Sh. H.S. Sahni, before whom the said statement was made on 15.10.2003, was also not examined on record. Thus, the said photocopy of a statement cannot be considered as proved as per law. Such a photocopy is neither primary evidence nor secondary evidence, and is rather no evidence at all in the eyes of law. It cannot be relied upon to ascertain the liability of the accused in the manner sought by the complainant. 20.Further, there is no show cause notice ever issued to the accused showing any assessment of such duty on account of drawback or export benefits on his part. Though CW-1 claimed that such a notice had been issued and also adjudicated in the year 2007, no such record was produced before the court. In the absence of any such assessment, it cannot be ascertained as to what was the liability against which the cheque had been issued. As already noticed, the accused is not required to lead evidence in defence to rebut the presumptions. In order to rebut the presumptions, he can point out the infirmities and deficiencies in the case of the complainant with or without leading evidence in defence. Thus, merely because no evidence in defence has been led by the accused, that would not give any benefit to the complainant. The evidence led by the complainant is not sufficient to prove the existence of debt or liability against the accused when the cheque had been issued. 21.The stand of the accused is squarely covered by the precedent relied upon by the Ld. Defence Counsel titled as Veena Ahuja v. Central Excise [Crl MC No. 1430/10, Delhi High Court, dated 23.03.2011) wherein the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi was pleased to quash the proceedings under section 138 NI Act on the ground that the liability assessed by the Central Excise Department had not attained finality on the date when the cheques had been obtained. In the present case also, no such liability had assessed by the complainant on the date of obtaining the cheques and even thereafter. Apparently, there is no order, decree or adjudication of any competent authority assessing the <span class="hidden_text" id="span_12">CC No. 102/13 Page 12 of 15</span> liability of the accused. The accused has not yet been held liable to pay any sum of money for evasion of customs duty and there is nothing to show that he is liable to pay any quantified customs duty on the date when the cheque had been issued. The proceedings of show cause notice, as claimed to have been adjudicated by CW-1 have not been placed on record. 22.At this stage, it is also to be noted that as per the complaint, the accused persons had undertook to produce drafts in lieu of the cheque in question and had agreed that in case they failed to do so, the cheque might be presented for encashment. The cheque was therefore presented when the accused to failed to tender the drafts even after lapse of three months. It would be thus seen that the cheque in question had not been actually issued towards discharge of any existing debt or liability but only as security to ensure payment by drafts. The accused persons were required to pay the amount by way of drafts and it was only upon their failure to do so that the cheque could have been presented. 23.It is now well settled that dishonour of a cheque, if issued as security for repayment of any money, would not make out an offence punishable under section 138 NI Act. In that case, the same would be civil liability and not a criminal liability under section 138 NI Act. In recent precedent titled as Indus Airways Pvt. Ltd. v. Magnum Aviation Pvt. Ltd. [Crl. Appeal no. 380/2014, decided on 07.04.2014], the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that to <span class="hidden_text" id="span_13">CC No. 102/13 Page 13 of 15</span> attract an offence under Section 138, there should be legally enforceable debt or other liability subsisting on the date of drawal of the cheque. Thus, drawal of the cheque in discharge of existing or past adjudicated liability is sine qua non for bringing an offence under Section 138. The Hon'ble Court held the law laid down in Shanku Concretes Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Gujarat [2000 CrLJ 1988] to be a correct law. In the said case, the liability was to repay the advance amount after six months, and to ensure said repayment, the cheques were issued. Thus, the liability was held to be a future liability, that was yet to arise upon happening of an event, that is, non-payment of amount after six months. Similar was the view in M/s. Collage Culture v. Apparel Export Promotion Council [2007 (4) JCC (NI) 388]. Thus, if a post dated cheque is issued for discharging a future liability that was yet to arise upon happening of a contingent event and as a collateral security, would not attract the provisions of section 138 NI Act. 24.In the case in hand, the cheque was given as security only as it could have been presented on a future date when the accused would have failed to pay the duty amount through drafts in future. Thus, in such a case, when the cheque in question was delivered, there was no existing debt or liability. The same would have come into existence only upon happening of a future contingent event, that is, failure of the accused to make the payment by way of drafts at a future date, as stated by the complainant itself. Therefore, even from this angle, <span class="hidden_text" id="span_14">CC No. 102/13 Page 14 of 15</span> accused persons cannot be held criminally liable under section 138 NI Act for dishonour of the cheque in question. 25.In view of the above discussion, the case of the complainant suffers a dent and is liable to fail. The complainant has not been able to establish that the cheque in question was issued towards discharge of existing debt or liability so as to make out the offence. The accused has been able to rebut the presumptions in favour of the complainant by raising a probable defence. 26.The accused persons are therefore acquitted of the charges. The bail bond of accused no. 2 shall however remain in force for the next six months in terms of section 437-A, CrPC. 27.File be consigned to the record room. Announced in the open court this 14th day of October 2014 (ASHU GARG) JSCC/ASCJ/GJ/MM Patiala House Courts, New Delhi <span class="hidden_text" id="span_15">CC No. 102/13 Page 15 of 15</span>
