DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG126

TITLE: Cc No.1194/2012 Satish Chander ... vs M/S New Kapoor Furnitures Page No. ... on 6 March, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/110130160/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, satish, chander, kapoor, furnitures, page, march, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF MS. NEHA PALIWAL METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-03, KKD, EAST, NEW DELHI Complaint No. 521/01/11 Unique ID No. 020402R0375992011 PS. Krishna Nagar Shri Satish Chander Sadh, Through its Authorized Representative Mr. Vijay Bhardwaj R/o E-160-161, Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi-110024 ......... Complainant. Versus (1). M/s Modern New Kapoor Jewelers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director Office at A-5/25, Krishna Nagar, Delhi - 110051 (2). Sh. Sita Ram Kapoor, S/o Late Sh. Ram Lal Kapoor Office at A-5/25, Krishna Nagar, Delhi - 110051 ......... Accused. COMPLAINT U/s 138 OF THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT Offence complained of : U/s 138 N.I. Act Plea of Accused persons : Not guilty Complaint filed on : 09.12.2011 Final Arguments heard & Concluded on : 01.03.2014 Date of decision of the case : 06.3.2014 Final order : Convicted U/s 138 NI Act. BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE CASE 1. The present case has been instituted on the complaint of the complainant Satish Chander Sadh, U/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (as amended up to date) against M/s. Modern New Kapoor Jewellers and its Managing Director, Sita Ram Kapoor. CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 1 of14 Pages 2. As per the complaint, it is the case of the complainant that the accused no.1 is a company and accused no.2 is the Managing Director of the same and accused no.2 approached the complainant for the purpose of availing a loan of Rs. 2 lakhs for 120 days with an assurance that he would repay the amount after 120 days and also gave post dated cheque bearing no. 178258 with the assurance that in case he fails to return the money then in discharge of the liability the complainant would be free to encash the said cheque. 3. It is the case of the complainant that the cheque was bearing no. 178258 dated 14.06.2011 drawn on Barclays Premier Bank and was given by the accused to the complainant with the assurance the same would be honoured on its presentation. 4. It is the case of the complainant that when the money was not returned by the accused, the complainant present the cheque on 21.09.2011 and received intimation through cheque return memo dated 26.09.2011 that the cheque was dishounoured with remarks "exceeds arrangement". 5. Thereafter, the complainant got issued a legal demand notice dated 20.10.2011, dispatched on 22.10.2011 to the accused which was sent to the accused by way of registered AD. 6. It is the case of the complainant that despite the receipt of the notice the accused has not paid the amount within 15 days from receipt of notice nor has replied to the same and therefore, the present complaint was filed by the complainant against the accused. Thus it is prayed by the complainant that the accused be tried and punished for the offence U/s 138 NI Act. 7. In the present matter the complaint was filed before the court on 09.12.2011. The cognizance for the offence was taken on 13.03.2012 and on the very same date the Ld. Predecessor of this court summoned the accused for the offence U/s 138 NI Act. 8. Thereafter, accused no.2 appeared before the court on 25.05.2012 and he also represented accused no.1 and he was admitted to bail on the same day. 9. Notice U/s 251 Cr.P.C. for the offence under section 138 NI Act was framed against the accused persons on 28.07.2012 to which accused no.2 on behalf of himself and accused no.1 pleaded not guilty CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 2 of14 Pages and claimed trial. It was submitted by accused no.2 at the stage of framing notice on behalf of himself and accused no.1 that he had signed the cheque in question. However, he had not handed over the same to the complainant but to one broker namely Tarun Sadh as he wanted an entry i.e. to make transaction in white. It was further submitted by him that the cheque was filled in all respects and he do not know the complainant and does not know how the cheque in question had reached the complainant. It was further submitted by him that he had no liability towards the complainant nor hence ever dealt with him. It was further submitted by the accused that he had not received the legal notice in the present matter. 10. The matter was thereafter fixed for cross examination of the complainant vide order dt. 28.07.2012 of the Ld. Predecessor Court and moving of the application u/s 145 (2) NI Act was dispensed with as it was submitted by the Ld. counsel for the accused that he has no objection if opportunity is granted to the accused to cross examine the complainant. 11. In the present matter, on 31.10.2013, it was submitted by accused no.2 that he wishes to withdraw his personal bond in the present matter and thereafter, as accused withdrew his personal bond, his surety bond was also cancelled and he was taken into custody in the present matter. 12. The complainant in post summoning complainant evidence has examined his AR as CW1 and has examined Sh. Vikas Kumar, Manager Barclays Bank as CW-2. CW-1 i.e. the AR of the complainant has tendered his evidence by way of affidavit before the court and relied upon the documents exhibited as Ex. CW-1/1 to Ex. CW-1/6 which are as under:- (a) Ex. CW-1/1 is the copy of special power of attorney, (b) Ex. CW-1/2 is Cheque bearing no. 178258, dated 14.06.2011 drawn on Barclays Premier Bank, (c) Ex. CW-1/3 is copy of letter dtd. 14.02.2011, (d) Ex. CW-1/4 is cheque returning memo dated 26.09.2011 containing remarks 'Exceeds arrangement', (e) Ex. CW-1/5 Colly. Is copy of Legal Notice dated 20.10.2011, and original postal receipts dtd. CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 3 of14 Pages 22.10.2011 and AD card, (f) Ex.CW1/6 is the complaint itself. 13. CW-2 has also tendered in his evidence by way of affidavit which is Ex. CW-2/A. Current statement of 24.09.2011 of Modern New Kapoor Jeweller and as Ex.CW2/B inward clearing items, branch wise report. 14. Post summoning complainant's evidence was closed in the present matter vide order of the Court dated 09.01.2014 and the matter was fixed for statement of accused. 15. Statement of accused U/s 313 read with Section 281 Cr.P.C. was recorded before the court on 09.01.2014 wherein it was submitted by the accused that the cheque in question was executed by him and was filled by him in all particulars and it bears his signature. It was further submitted by him that however, he has given this cheque to Tarun Kumar Sadh as he was his broker between him and the complainant. It was further submitted that he had given this cheque to Tarun Kumar Sadh for the purpose of giving the same to the complainant as security as he had taken money from the complainant through the broker. It was further submitted by him that he had already repaid the amount to Tarun Kumar Sadh 4-5 days prior to the date of the maturity however, Tarun Kumar Sadh despite assurance did not return the cheque to him. He had also not returned one another cheque to him which is on record. It was submitted by the accused that his cheques have been misused and he wishes to lead evidence in his defence. 16. Thereafter, the matter was fixed for defence evidence. An application U/s 315 Cr.P.C. was moved by the accused for getting himself examined as a witness and the same was allowed vide order of the court dated 05.2.2014. Accused was examined as DW-1 on 15.02.2014. As it was submitted by the accused that he does not wish to examine any other witness in his defence, defence evidence was closed vide order of the court dated 15.2.2014 and the matter was fixed for final arguments. 17. I have heard the arguments as advanced by the Ld. counsels for the complainant and the accused and have gone through the material placed on record alongwith the evidence adduced by the parties before the court. 18. Before adverting to the case in hand it is necessary to discuss the CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 4 of14 Pages law of the land as applicable to the present case in hand. The main ingredients of Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act are as follows:- (a) The accused issued a cheque on an account maintained by him with a bank. (b) The said cheque has been issued in discharge of any legal debt or other liability. (c) The cheque has been presented to the bank within the period of six months from the date of the issuance of the cheque or within the period of its validity. (d) When the aforesaid cheque was presented for encashment, the same was returned unpaid/ dishonoured. (e) The Payee of the cheque issued a legal notice of demand within 30 days from the receipt of information by him from the Bank regarding the return of the cheque. (f) The Drawer of the cheque failed to make the payment within 15 days of the receipt of the aforesaid legal notice of demand. 19. If the aforesaid ingredients are satisfied then the drawer of the cheque shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act. 20. In the present case in hand the accused has admitted before the court that the cheque in question was executed by him. However, it is his case that he had not handed over the cheque in question to the complainant and instead of the complainant has handed over the same to the broker i.e. Tarun Kumar Sadh. It is his case that he does not know the complainant. At the stage of framing of notice, it is submitted by him that the cheque was given for the purpose of showing an entry i.e. to make transaction in white whereas at the stage of statement of accused, it is submitted by the accused that the cheque was given for the purpose of security in order to give the same to the complainant as Tarun Kumar Sadh was a broker between him and the complainant. Accused has appeared in the witness box as DW-1 and has deposed before the court that he does not know the complainant and had taken CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 5 of14 Pages the loan from Tarun Kumar Sadh and had given the security cheque to him and had returned the loan amount to Tarun Kumar Sadh 4-5 days prior to the date of maturity of cheque. It was deposed that he has never seen the complainant and had no liability of any loan amount towards the complainant and the cheque given by him to Tarun Kumar Sadh has been misused by Tarun Kumar Sadh in connivance with the complainant. 21. In view of the abovesaid statement of the accused made before the court, at the stage of notice, at the stage of statement of accused and in evidence on oath before the court, it is categorically clear that the cheque in question was issued by the accused on an account maintained by him and that the same bears the signature of the accused. Though it is evered by hte accused that he had not handed over the cheque to the complainant, however the cheque bears the name of the complainant as the payee of the cheque and it is admitted by hte accused that he has filled the name of the payee therein and therefore the contention of the accused that he had not given the cheque in question to the complainant, holds no force and it is established that the cheque was given by the accused to the complainant. More so, if the cheque is issued by the drawer i.e. accused in favour of the complainant then by no stretch of imagination can one believe that the accused would not be knowing the complainant, even if the transaction is facilitated by a third party. 22. Further more in the present matter, the complainant has filed before the court AD card which is bearing the signature of the accused and the accused in his cross examination had stated thathe does not remember the sign which is on the AD card. The perusal of the AD card clearly shows that the signatures on the same are of the accused. More so, in the present matter legal notice was also sent to the accused on the very address which is the address mentioned in the memo of parties. 23. In the present matter though it is submitted by the accused at the stage of notice that he has not received the legal notice, however, the legal notice was sent to the accused by the complainant on the very same address which is mentioned in the memo of parties annexed with the present complaint and the accused was sent summons by the court CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 6 of14 Pages on the very same address pursuant to which accused had appeared before the court and furthermore, AD card bearing the signatures of the accused is also proved on record. In view of the same, it is established that accused has received the legal notice in the present case. 24. Thus in the present matter the complainant has been able to prove before the court that the cheque was drawn by the accused on the account maintained by him in the bank which had been returned dishonoured, due to remarks 'exceed arrangement' and the sending of the legal notice. The only question which remains to the determination is whether the cheque was issued for discharge in whole or in part of any debt or other liability. 25. Complainant in support of his case has examined SPA as CW1 in the present matter and he has deposed before the court that the complainant is not having any license for granting loan to persons and had granted a friendly loan to the accused in his presence on 14.02.2011 and on the very same date, the accused handed over the cheque in question to the complainant to discharge his liability and the accused was accompanied by Tarun Kumar Sadh. It was further admitted that no interest was given in the present matter by the accused to the complainant. 26. DW-1 had deposed that he had already repaid the loan amount to Tarun Kumar Sadh 4-5 prior to the date of maturity of the cheque and had given the present cheque as security cheque to him. DW-1 has also in his cross examination admitted his signatures on the photocopy of the letter/receipt dtd. 14.02.2011 Ex.CW1/3. 27. Section 118 NI Act raises a number of presumptions of consideration, date, time of acceptance, time of transfer and status of holder in due course unless the contrary is proved. The section lays down special rule of evidence applicable to negotiable instruments and presumptions are one of law and the court shall presume that the negotiable instrument which is the cheque in the present case, was made for consideration, was made on the date which it bears and that it was handed over to the complainant by the accused in due course. 28. Section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act raises presumption that the holder of the cheque which is the complainant in the present case received the cheque for the discharge in whole or in part of any CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 7 of14 Pages debt or other liability. 29. However, these presumption U/s 118 and Section 139 NI Act are rebuttable in nature. These presumptions have to be compulsorily raised as soon as the execution of cheque by the accused is admitted or proved by the complainant and thereafter the burden is shifted to accused to prove otherwise. A presumption is not itself evidence, but only makes a prima facie case for a party for whose benefit it exists. 30. In the present case in hand the accused has admitted before the court that the cheque in question bears his signatures though he has disputed the handing over of the cheque to the complainant for discharge of any legally enforceable debt or other liability and has stated that he had handed over the cheque as security to the broker Tarun Kumar Sadh. Thus in the present case the execution of the cheque is admitted by the accused before the court and once it is admitted the presumptions come into force. However, these presumptions are rebuttable in nature, but the onus to rebut the same is upon the accused. 31. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Krishna Janardhan Bhatt Vs Dattatraya G. Hegde (2008) 2 Supreme Court Cases (Cri.) 166 has cautioned that the court must be on guard to see that merely on the application of presumption as contemplated U/s 139 of the NI Act, the same may not lead to injustice or mistaken conviction. 32. The standard of proof, so as to prove a defence on the part of the accused is preponderance of probabilities whose inference can be drawn not only from the materials brought on record by the parties, but also by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies. It was held by the Hon'ble Apex court in a catena of judgments that where chances of false implication cannot be ruled out, the background fact and the conduct of the parties together with their legal requirements are required to be taken into consideration. 33. It has been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Catena of judgments that the standard of proof in discharge of the burden in terms of section 139 of the Act being preponderance of probabilities the inference therefore, can be drawn not only from the material brought on record but also from the reference to the circumstances upon which the CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 8 of14 Pages accused relies upon. Furthermore it is not essential for the accused to get himself examined as witness and he can discharge the burden of proof which has been shifted upon him due to the presumptions even by cross examination of the complainant's witnesses. 34. In the case of Kumar Exports VS Sharma Carpets 2009 II AD (SC) 117 it was held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that to rebut the statutory presumptions the accused may either adduce direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be discharged by him. However, the court need not insist on every case that the accused should disprove the non-existence of consideration and debt by leading direct evidence, because the existence of negative evidence at all times is neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time mere denial of passing of consideration and existence of debt also would not serve the purpose of accused, something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the complainant. It was further held that once the rebutal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court the evidential burden shifts back upon the complainant and thereafter, the presumptions U/s 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the complainant's rescue. 35. Thus it has been held by Hon'ble Apex Court that Section 139 of the Act is an example of reverse onus clause which has been included for improving the credibility of Negotiable Instruments. However, as the offence U/s 138 is a regulatory offence only, therefore, test of proportionality should guide the construction and interpretation of reverse onus clauses and the accused cannot be expected to discharge an unduly high standard of proof. 36. In view of the above said decisions it can be safely said that the onus upon the accused is only to show a probable defence which is not high as that of beyond reasonable doubt and only the accused has to prove his defence to the extent of preponderance of probabilities in order to shift back the onus upon the complainant to prove his case before the court. 37. In the present case in hand though contradictory stands are taken by the accused in his statement before the court at the stage of framing of notice and in his subsequent statements, however still the CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 9 of14 Pages accused has been able to rebut the presumption as raised U/s 118 and 139 of NI Act on the following grounds. 38. Firstly, in the present matter, the complainant himself has not entered into the witness box and it is deposed by his attorney that the loan was given by the complainant to the accused in cash. The accused has admitted that he has received the loan amount and has stated that he had given the cheque in question to one Tarun Kumar Sadh as security. Though, it is contradictory statement of the accused, contradicting the statement made at the stage of notice, that he had given the cheque to Tarun Kumar Sadh for the purpose of making entry however, this submission is substantiated by the evidence led by the complainant as it is the case of the complainant that the cheque was given on the very same date when the loan was given i.e. on 14.02.2011. The receipt dtd. 14.02.2011 is a document of the complainant, relied upon by the complainant and put to the accused at the stage of cross examination and accused admitted his signatures upon the same. The said document is categorically mentioning that the impugned cheque was given as security. 39. Further more, it is nowhere the case of the complainant that any written instruction was given to him by the accused..................... the legality and validity of such cheque as to whether the same was given as security or towards a liability or otherwise. In the present matter, it is admitted by the complainant that the cheque was handed over to him blank by the accused. No written instruction is placed on record by the complainant to show that the accused has authorised him later on to present the cheque in question after filling the same before the bank. 32. Further, it is the case of the complainant that the accused has given him interest on the loan. However, no statement of account in order to show the payment of interest by the accused to the complainant is proved before the court. 33. In the case of M/s Collage Culture VS Apparel Export Promotion Council, 2007 (4) JCC (NI) 388, it was held by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi that a post dated cheque may be issued under two circumstances, one, it may be issued for a debt in presenti but payable in future, second it may be issued for a debt which may become payable in future upon occurrence of a contingent event. The second types of CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 10 of14 Pages cheque would be by way of security. 39. In the case of Vipul Kumar Gupta Vs Vipin Gupta 2012 (4) JCC (NI) 248 it was held by Hon'ble High Court of Delhi as under :- I find myself in agreement with reasoning given by Ld. ACMM that before a person is convicted for having committed an offence under section 138 of the Act, it must be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the cheque in question, which has been made as a basis of prosecuting the respondent/accused, must have been issued by him in the discharge of his liability or a legally recoverable debt. In the facts and circumstances of this case, there is every reason to doubt the version given by the appellant that the cheque was issued in the discharge of a liability or a legally recoverable debt. The reasons for this, are a number of facts which have been enumerated by the Learned ACMM also. Some of them are that non- mentioning by the appellant in his Income Tax Return or the Books of Accounts, the factum of the loan having been given by him because by no measure, an amount of Rs. 9,00,000/- can be said to be a small amount which a person would not reflect in his Books of Accounts or Income Tax Return, in case the same has been lent to a person. The appellant, neither in the complaint nor in his evidence, has mentioned the date, time or the year when the loan was sought or given. The appellant has presented a cheque, which obviously is written with two different inks, as the signatures is appearing in one ink, while as the remaining portion, which has been filled up in the cheque, is in a different ink. All these factors prove the defence of the respondent to be plausible to the effect that he CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 11 of14 Pages had issued these cheques by way of security to the appellant for getting a loan from Prime Minister Rojgar Yojna. The respondent/accused has only to create a doubt in the version of the appellant, while as the appellant has to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt in which in my opinion he has failed miserably." 40. Thus in the said judgment also the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi uphelded the judgment of the trial court on the reasoning that the loan transaction was not shown in either Books of Accounts or Income Tax Returns and the cheque was written in two different inks, signatures in one ink and body in the another. In the present case in hand as well the complainant has failed to show before the court that the loan transaction was shown in the Income Tax Returns, the transaction was not by way of an account payee cheque, the body of the cheque was written with different ink and the cheque was signed with different ink, the complainant has failed to show before the court his capacity to give a loan of Rs. 2.5 lacs to the accused and has further failed to show that any interest was paid by the accused to the complainant by way of any statement of account. 41. Thus in the present case, the accused has been able to rebut the presumptions as laid U/s 118 and 139 of NI Act and the onus has shifted upon the complainant to prove the guilt of the accused beyond the shadow of all reasonable doubts. However, in the present case the complainant after the onus has shifted upon him has failed to prove the guilt of the accused beyond the shadow of all reasonable doubts. 40. Section 118 NI Act raises a number of presumptions of consideration, date, time of acceptance, time of transfer and status of holder in due course unless the contrary is proved. The section lays down special rule of evidence applicable to negotiable instruments and presumptions are one of law and the court shall presume that the negotiable instrument which is the cheque in the present case, was made for consideration, was made on the date which it bears and that it was handed over to the complainant by the accused in due course. 41. Section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act raises presumption CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 12 of14 Pages that the holder of the cheque which is the complainant in the present case received the cheque for the discharge in whole or in part of any debt or other liability. 42. Though, these presumption U/s 118 and Section 139 NI Act are rebutable in nature, the accused has failed to rebut these presumptions before the court. These presumptions have to be compulsorily raised as soon as the execution of cheque by the accused is admitted or proved by the complainant and thereafter the burden is shifted to accused to prove otherwise. A presumption is not itself evidence, but only makes a prima facie case for a party for whose benefit it exists. 43. In the case of Kumar Exports VS Sharma Carpets 2009 II AD (SC) 117 it was held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that to rebut the statutory presumptions the accused may either adduce direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be discharged by him. However, the court need not insist on every case that the accused should disprove the non-existence of consideration and debt by leading direct evidence, because the existence of negative evidence at all times is neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time mere denial of passing of consideration and existence of debt also would not serve the purpose of accused, something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the complainant. It was further held that once the rebutal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court the evidential burden shifts back upon the complainant and thereafter, the presumptions U/s 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the complainant's rescue. 44. Thus the accused has to bring before the court something probable in his support in order to shift the burden back to the complainant. Mere denial of liability or averment that the cheque was a security cheque would not suffice. 45. In the present matter the accused has failed to rebut the presumptions and therefore, it is established before the court that the cheque was given for consideration by the accused to the complainant for the discharge of liability as it is the admitted case of the accused that he had signed the cheque in question, he had received Rs. 2 lacs by way of cheque from the complainant through Tarun Kumar Sadh, he CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 13 of14 Pages had even paid interest by way of cheques to the complainant. He has failed to show any ocular or documentary evidence in his favour in order to show before the court that he had returned the said amount to Tarun Kumar Sadh. Tarun Kumar Sadh had come into the witness box and had categorically denied that he has received Rs. 2 lacs from the accused. 46. Thus, in the present case in hand, the existence of cheque duly signed by the accused is proved before the court and in view of the presumption of Section 118 and 139 of NI Act which are not rebutted by the accused, it is presumed that this cheque was drawn for consideration and on the date which it bear and that the complainant is the holder of the cheque in due course and that he received the cheque for the discharge in whole or part of debt or liability. 47. The complainant has further proved before the court that the cheque was dishonoured with the reasons funds insufficient and that the accused has not paid the cheque amount to the complainant. The ingredients of Section 138 NI Act are fulfilled. In view of the same accused is convicted for the offence U/s 138 NI Act. 48. Let he be heard separately on the point of sentence. 49. Let convict be provided with copy of judgment free of cost. Announced in the open court today i.e. 6.3.2014 (NEHA PALIWAL) MM(E):KKD:DELHI It is certified that the judgment contains 14 pages and all the pages bear my signatures. (NEHA PALIWAL) MM:KKD:DELHI:6.3.2014 CC No.1194/2012 Satish Chander Sadh Vs M/s New Kapoor Furnitures Page no. 14 of14 Pages
