DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG089

TITLE: Judgment Reported As State Of M. P. vs Hira Lal & Ors (96), on 5 March, 2007

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/2911307/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, judgment, reported, hira, march, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

1 IN THE COURT OF MS. ANU GROVER BALIGA MM, NEW DELHI CC No. 4516/1 Annamalai Finance Ltd. 26/25, Old Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi -110060. VS Ashok Kriplani R/o. 17/13, Old Rajender Nagar New Delhi - 110060. 05.03.2007 JUDGMENT 1. ) Briefly stated the averments on the basis of which the present complaint has been filed are as follows : i) It is averred that the complainant is a public limited company doing the business of finance and having its office at Coimbatore. ii) According to the complainant the accused had approached them for a loan of Rs. 6 Lacs and in lieu thereof had executed three promissory notes dated 04.04.95, 12.04.95 and 26.04.95 in favour of the complainant. It is the averment of the complainant that the promissory notes executed by the accused clearly stipulated that the rate of interest agreed between the parties was 26.78%. It is further stated that on 28.03.97, the accused had issued a cheque for a sum of Rs. 9,99,301/- in favour of the complainant company in order to discharge his liability to pay the loan amount alongwith the interest. iii) The case of the complainant is that this cheque on presentation was dishonoured for reasons of '' insufficient funds'' on 29.05.97 and that the same information was received by the complainant on 04.06.97. iv)A legal notice and a telegram was sent to the accused calling upon him to make the payment of the dishonoured cheque. However, since he failed to do so, the present complaint has been filed. 2) It is relevant to mention herein that, that the complaint was originally filed before the the court of Ld. Judicial Magistrate, Coimbatore, but was thereafter, on a petition moved by the accused, transferred to the Delhi Court vide orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. 3) Notice U/s. 251 Cr.PC was framed against the accused on 21.04.2003 to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 4) The complainant in support of its case examined three witnesses. PW 1 Shri R. Parmashivam, authorized representative of the complainant has filed his affidavit for the purposes of evidence. In the same the contents of the complaint have more or less been reiterated. The cheque in dispute has been exhibited as Ex. PW1/B. The original cheque return memos have been exhibited as Ex. PW1/C and PW1/D. The copy of the legal notice sent to the accused has been exhibited as Ex. PW1/E. The returned envelope sent at the address of the accused has been exhibited as Ex. PW1/F. The certified copy of the legal notice sent by telegram at the office of the accused has been exhibited as Ex. PW1/G. The certified copy of the telegram issued at the residence of the accused has been exhibited as Ex. PW1/H. The letter issued by the department of telecommunication confirming the delivery of the telegram has been exhibited as Ex. PW1/I. The said witness PW 1 was duly cross examined by the accused himself. 5) CW 2 Shri R.K. Anand, Officer of the Oriental Bank of Commerce, has brought on record the statement of account of the accused, which has been exhibited as Ex. CW2/1. He also confirmed that the return memo Ex. CW1/D has been issued by Oriental Bank of Commerce. 6) CW 3 Senthil Kumaran, Officer of Karur Vaishey Bank, has deposed that Ex. PW1/C is the return memo issued by his bank. This witness was also duly cross examined by the accused and in his cross examination this witness stated that the collection charges of Rs. 1500/- was levied upon the complainant for the dishonouring of the cheque. 7) The entire incriminating evidence was put to the accused and his statement was recorded u/s 313 Cr. P.C. In the said statement the accused admitted that he had taken a loan of Rs. 6 Lacs from the complainant, however, he denied that the rate of interest agreed between the parties was 26.78%. He further stated that he did not issue the cheque in dispute towards the repayment of principle loan amount and the interest and according to him he had given the cheque in blank in February 1996 on the request of the complainant. He further stated that the cheque was either given by him as a security or towards the outstanding interest that was pending as on February'1996. He has asserted that he never received any legal notice from the complainant, as his office was lying closed since the year 1996 and he was himself residing at Rajasthan. The accused has produced eight witnesses in his defence. 8) The accused himself appeared as a defence witness, DW1 and filed his affidavit for the purposes of evidence. In the said affidavit he has deposed that the promissory notes have been materially altered by the complainant with regard to the dates and the interest rate. He has deposed that the rate of interest that was agreed between him and the complainant was 22% per annum and not 26.78%. He also deposed that at the time of taking a loan he had pledged shares worth more than Rs. 8 Lacs and immovable property worth Rs. 12 Lacs with the complainant. The promissory notes have been exhibited as Ex. DE-1/A, Ex. DE-1/B and Ex. DE-1/C. 9) The accused has also deposed that during the year 1996 - 97, he had shifted to Alwar (Rajasthan). He has placed on record the rent agreement Ex. DE-1/O. Various documents have also been filed by the accused to show that his place of residence in the year 1997 was Alwar and that he did not receive the legal notice sent by the complainant. 10)DW 2, is the Executive Officer from National Stock Exchange, Janpath. This witness was summoned by the accused to prove the rates of the shares pledged by him with the complainant Company. 11)DW 3 is a Supervisor of Telegraph Office, Prasad Nagar. This witness was summoned by the accused to produce the text message and record of telegram dated 07.06.97 allegedly sent by the complainant to him. This witness merely stated that he could not bring the summoned record because the same has been destroyed. The requisite certificate in this regard has been exhibited as Ex. DW3/A. 12)DW 4 Shri S. Narainan, is the Manager of the complainant company, who had worked with the complainant company w.e.f 1989 till March 1996. This witness has stated that he does recall by whom were the promissory notes Ex. DE-1/A to C attested. 13)DW 5 Pradeep Godwani has deposed that the accused was his employee in the year 1995-98 and that the accused was posted as Commercial Manager at Alwar in the entire year 1997. In his cross examination this witness admitted that he had not brought on record any proof of his identity or the fact that the accused was his employee. 14)DW 6 R.K. Anand, Officer of Oriental Bank of Commerce has brought on record the certified copy of the statement of account of the accused for the period 01.04.95 to 31.05.95 and the same has been exhibited as Ex. DW6/A to DW6/3. He has also filed on record the relevant pages of the ''cheque issue'' register, which has been exhibited as Ex. DW6/4 and DW6/5. This witness has further deposed that as per their statement of account, on 04.05.96 an amount of Rs. 20,020/- was paid from the account of the accused to the complainant vide cheque bearing no.501444 and another amount of Rs. 5000/- was paid to the complainant from the account of the accused vide chqeue bearing no. 508727. The statement of account of the accused in this regard has been exhibited as Ex. DW6/6. 15)DW 7, the Manager Sterilite Industries has been summoned by the accused to prove the enhancement of the shares prices of this Company. 16)DW 8, Shri B.S. Meena has deposed that the accused was his tenant at Alwar for the period February' 1997 to December' 1997 at monthly rent of Rs. 4000/-. 17)DW 9 Deepak Dhull, Cashier, Indian Overseas Bank has brought on record the certified statement of account of the complainant for the year 1995 and the same has been exhibited as Ex. DW9/A. 18)The Ld. Counsel for the complainant and the accused appearing in person have relied upon the various authorities in support of their respective stands. According to the Ld. Counsel for the complainant, the complainant has brought on record sufficient evidence to prove that all the ingredients of the offence U/s. 138 of N.I. Act are clearly made out against the accused. On the other hand the accused has contended that he had issued a blank cheque in favour of the complainant and that the cheuqe was not issued for any liability or debt. It is also been contended by the accused that the legal notice sent by the complainant was never served upon the accused and therefore the complaint on this ground alone is liable to be dismissed. It has also been contended by the accused that the cheque in dispute was presented by the complainant twice with their bankers i.e. Kurur Visya Bank at Coimbatore and according to the accused, on both the occasions the bankers discounted bounced cheque and thus became the purchaser of the dishonoured cheque U/s. 59 of N.I, Act. He has therefore submitted that only the bankers have a remedy to file the present complaint and the complainant cannot now maintain the present complaint. 19)I will first deal with the objections of the accused as regards the non service of the legal notice upon him. In this regard it will be relevant to consider firstly the evidence that has been brought by the complainant on record. Ex PW 1/F is the registered envelop through which the legal notice was sent to the accused at 17/13, Ground Floor, Old Rajender Nagar, New Delhi. This registered envelop was received back by the complainant with the report that the house of the accused was found locked on seven occasions when the postal offcial went to deliver the same. Ex PW 1/G & H are the certified copies of the telegram that was sent to the accused by the complainant at his residence and office address respectively. The letter issued by the department of the Tele-communications confirmed that the telegram Ex DW1/I was delivered at both the addresses of the accused. 20)All the aforementioned documents clearly show that the complainant took all the steps that were necessary to serve upon the accused, its demand of payment. The accused has admitted during the trial that his residence was 17/13, Ground Floor, Old Rajender Nagar, New Delhi, but his only defence is that during the year 1997 he was not residing at his Delhi address and was residing at Alwar. Admittedly the accused has failed to prove on record that he had informed the complainant on or before year 1997 that he was not residing in Delhi in the year 1997 and that his place of residence has shifted to Alwar. In other words the complainant had no information or knowledge that the accused had temporarily shifted from his last known address at Delhi. In such circumstances, according to me the complainant fulfilled its duty by sending the legal notice to the last known address of the accused. Even if the registered envelop was returned back to the complainant with remarks "house locked", the complainant was under no legal duty or obligation to trace out any fresh address of the accused. In this respect in the judgment reported as State of M. P. vs Hira Lal & Ors (96), 7SCC523, Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that where the notice sent is returned with postal remarks ''not available in the house'', ''house locked'' and ''shop closed, such notices are deemed to have been served upon the addressee. Similarly in other case reported as K Bhaskaran vs SankaranVaidhyan Balan (1997) 7SCC, Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that : ''The context envisaged in Section 138 of the Act invites a liberal interpretation for the person who has the statutory obligation to give notice because he is presumed to be the loser in the transaction and it is for his interest the very provision is made by the legislature. The words in clause (b) of the proviso to Section 138 NI Act show that the payee has the statutory obligation to ''make a demand'' by giving notice. The thrust in the clause is on the need to ''make a demand''. It is only the mode for making such demand which the legislature has prescribed. A payee can send the notice for doing his part for giving the notice. Once it is dispatched his part is over and the next depends on what the sendee does.'' Maxwell's Interpretation of Statutes, relied on ''If a strict interpretation is given that the drawer should have actually received the notice for the period of 15 days to start running no matter that the payee sent the notice at the correct address, a trickster cheque drawer would get the premium to avoid receiving the notice by different strategies and he could escape from the legal consequences of Section 13 8NI Act. It must be borne in mind that the court should not adopt an interpretation which helps a dishonest evader and clips an honest payee as that would defeat the very legislative measure'' 21.The contention of the accused is that he was not residing at his Delhi address in the year 1997 and therefore he was not actually served with the notice. He contends that as per the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as '' D. Vinod Shivappa Vs. Nanda Belliappa, 2006, Cr. L.J, 2897 '' the service of the legal notice upon him cannot be deemed. In the said judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is for the drawer to prove that he was not really served with a legal notice and that he was not responsible for such non service and if the drawer, accused is able to prove these facts, the presumption of service of legal notice cannot be made upon him, only on the basis of the postal receipts / documents filed by the complainant. In my considered opinion, though the accused has been able to show that he was not residing in Delhi in the year 1997, however, he has failed to show that he informed this fact to the complainant and thus according to me it is the accused himself who is responsible for the non service of the legal notice sent to him by registered post. 22.Even otherwise the Ld. counsel for complainant has rightly contended that the notice that was issued to the accused through telegram also satisfies the requirements of the legal notice as envisaged by section 138 NI Act. It is rightly contended by the Ld. Counsel for complainant that section 138 N.I. Act does not specify a particular mode by which the legal notice u/ 138 NI Act is to be sent nor does it specify the language to be used in such notices. In SIL Impex vs Exim Aides, 1999 (4 SCC 567), it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that a notice u/s 138 NI Act can be sent through any mode and that it is not necessary that it should be sent vide registered post or through a messenger. Hon'ble Supreme Court in this case accepted that fax transmission of a notice is valid. On the basis of the observations made by the hon'ble Supreme Court, it is rightly contended by the Ld. Counsel for complainant that legal notice sent by the complainant to the accused by telegram is also valid. A perusal of telegram Ex PW 1/H clearly shows that the complainant has made specific demand of the cheque amount from the accused. Further the certified copies of the telegram and the certificate issued by the Postal Authorities in respect of the delivery of this telegram clearly raises a presumption with regard to the delivery of this telegram and this presumption has no where been rebutted by the accused at all. 23.In view of my discussions hereinabove I am of the considered opinion that the complainant has discharged its duty by proving that it has served the legal notice to the accused demanding the cheque amount from him and the complaint can not be dismissed on the ground that the accused did not receive the same as he was not residing at his permanent address at that time. 24.As regards, the further contention of the accused that the bankers of the complainant in the present case became the holder in due course of the cheque in dispute and therefore they alone were entitled to maintain a complaint U/s. 138 of N.I. Act against the accused, it is suffice to state that the accused has not brought any evidence on record to show that the said cheque was purchased by the bankers of the complainant nor was any suggestions made in this respect, either to the complainant's AR nor to the bank witnesses. 25.Now coming to the next issue between the parties namely whether the cheque was issued by the accused in consideration of an existing debt or liability, it is rightly contended by the Ld. Counsel for complainant that as per the provisions of the Section 118 and 139 of Negotiable Instrument Act and the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a catena of judgments, once when the execution of a negotiable instrument is admitted, there is a presumption that it is supported by consideration and thereafter it is upon the accused to rebut this legal presumption against him. 26.In a case reported as Bharat Barrel and Drum Manufacturing Company Vs. Amin Chand Payrelal, AIR 1999 SC 1008, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was dealing with section 118 of N.I. Act and while so discussing laid down the principles which are applicable in suits / cases involving the execution of Negotiable Instruments Act. In Para 12 of its judgment the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that : ''once execution of the promissory note is admitted, the presumption under section 118 (a) would arise that it is supported by consideration. Such a presumption is rebuttable. The defendant can prove the non-existence of consideration by raising a probable defence. If the defendant is proved to have discharged the initial onus of proof showing that the existence of consideration was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the plaintiff who will be obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and upon its failure to prove would dis-entitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. The burden upon the defendant of proving the non-existence of the consideration can be either direct or by bringing on record the preponderance of probabilities by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies. In such an event the defendant is entitled under law to rely upon all the evidence led in the case including that of the plaintiff as well. In case, where the defendant fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non-existence of the consideration, the plaintiff would invariably be held entitled o the benefit of presumption arising under section 118 (a) in his favour. The Court may not insist upon the defendant to disprove the existence of consideration by leading direct evidence as existence of negative evidence is neither possible nor contemplated and even if led is to be seen with a doubt. The bare denial of the passing of the consideration apparently does not appear to be any defence. Something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the benefit of shifting the onus of proving to the plaintiff. To disprove the presumption the defendant has to bring on record such facts and circumstances, upon consideration of which the Court may either believe that the consideration did not exist or its non-existence was so probable that a prudent man would, under the circumstances of the case, shall act upon the plea that it did not exist'' 27.In another judgment reported as M.S. Narayana Menon Vs. State of Keral (2006) 6SCC 39, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has reiterated the observations made by it in the judgment of Bharat Barrel's case. 28. Therefore what is to be examined in the present case is whether the accused has been able to discharge this onus or not. According to the Ld. counsel for complainant the accused has miserably failed to discharge this onus. Ld. counsel for complainant has pointed out that the accused in his statement recorded u/s 313 Cr. P. C., admits that he took a loan of Rs. 6 lacs from the complainant and that he executed promissory notes in possession of the complainant. It is also contended that the accused himself deposes in his affidavit that he had also pledged some of his shares and had mortgaged him immoveable property with the complainant as security against the loan taken. It is also an admitted position between the parties that the accused did not repay the loan on 28.03.07. Ld. counsel for complainant therefore submits that the fact of an existing debt or liability as on 28.03.07 is not at all disputed by the accused and further the issuance of the cheque in favour of the complainant is also not disputed by the accused. Thus according to the Ld. counsel for complainant the only conclusion is that the accused is taking a false defence that the cheque was not given by him in consideration of an existing debt or liability. 29.On the other hand the accused submits that as he had issued a blank cheque in favour of the complainant in the month of February 1996, wherein the amount of the cheque and the date were left blank and according to him this cheque was issued by him towards the re-payment of interest that had accrued as on February 1996 or as a security. It is also pointed by the accused that the complainants have admitted in their reply to a discharge application filed by the accused, that the cheque was infact blank as regards the date and the amount. It is further pointed out by the accused that PW 1 in his cross examination also admits this fact. It is further contended by the accused that the allegation of the complainant that the cheque in dispute was given to them on 28.03.97 is falsified by the own testimony of PW 1 in as much as this witness states in his cross examination that the cheque was given on 28.3.97 at the Delhi office of the complainant, though in the affidavit of PW 1 it is clearly stated that the cheque in dispute was presented for encashment for the first time on 28.03.97 in Coimbatore, an act which could not have been possible if that cheque was received at Delhi on 28.03.97. This anamoly, according to the accused is sufficient to prove that the complainant is taking a false stand that the cheque was given to them in March 1997. 30.It is further submitted by the accused that the ledger being maintained by him and filed on record (EX DE-1/N) clearly shows that the cheque in dispute was issued by him in favour of the complainant in February 1996. He therefore points out that the blank cheque given by him in February 1996 could not have been filled up by the complainant in March 1997 as on that date they had no implied authority of the accused to fill up an amount of Rs. 9,99,301/- in the cheque. For this contention accused has relied upon the following authorities 1.1995 Cr. LJ 560 2. III (2002) BC 419 3. 2004(I) RCR (Crl.) 284 4. Griffiths vs Dalton (1940) 2.K.B. 264 31.It is also contended by the accused that not only has the cheque in dispute been materially altered by the complainant but the complainant has also materially altered the promissory notes executed by the accused in favour of the complainant. According to the accused the rate of interest and the dates in the promissory notes have been altered by the complainant in as much as neither the promissory notes were executed on the dates mentioned therein nor was the rate of interest ever agreed between the parties @ 26% per annum. It is the submission of the accused that the promissory notes have thus become void u/s 87 of Negotiable Instruments Act and this by itself rebuts the presumption raised against him u/s 118 and 139 of Negotiable Instrument Act. For this contention accused has relied upon the following authorities. 1. AIR 1935 RANGOON131 2. 1965 RLW 47 (Raj) 3. AIR 1966 A. P. 267 4. AIR 1974 MADRAS 4 5. AIR 1982 KANT. 227 6. AIR 1983 ALL. 81 7. AIR 1986 A.P. 120 8. 1995 Cr.L.J. 560 9. AIR 1998 MADRAS 67 32.The accused has further contended that even if it is presumed that the complainant had the authority to fill up the cheque with the amount that was due from the accused as on 28.03.97, even then the cheque in question is invalid in as much as if the amount due from the accused is calculated at the rate of interest 26.7% per annum and the accused is given credit of the two payments of Rs. 25,000/-, only an amount of Rs. 8,90,177/- was due from the accused as on 28.03.97. He therefore contends that the complainant could not have filled up the cheque for an amount higher then this amount and that this itself takes the present case outside the purview of the Section 138 NI Act. 33.In rebuttal to the aforementioned contentions of the accused Ld. Counsel for complainant states that the accused has miserably failed to show that the promissory notes were materially altered or that the rate of interest of 26.78% was not agreed between the parties. According to him, none of the judgments relied upon by the accused are applicable to the facts of the present case, since the complainant has not sued on the basis of the promissory notes but has sued on the basis of the cheque issued by the accused. He further submits that even if the accused has not been given a credit of the payment already paid by him in March 1996, while coming to the figure 9,99,301/-, even then it does not exculpate him of the offence u/s 138 NI Act. In this respect, Ld. counsel for complainant has relied upon an authority of the Hon'ble High Court of Kerala reported as R. Gopikuttan Pillai vs Sankara Narayanan Nair, Equivalent citation:I(204)BC. 34.I have gone through all the judgments filed by both the parties and have also given careful consideration to the submissions made by them. According to me, the one distinguishing feature in the present case, is that the cheque in dispute issued by the accused is admittedly, an incomplete negotiable instrument. No doubt under Section 20 NI Act, the complainant was within its right to complete the same before its presentation, however the date and amount that could have been filled up in the cheque was to have been agreed to, between the parties expressly or impliedly. The contention of the accused is that he did not give any authority, express or implied, to the complainant to fill up the date of 28.03.97 and the amount of Rs. 9,99,301/- in the cheque. To rebut the presumption raised against him by virtue of Section 118(b) NI Act with respect to the date filled up in the cheque, the accused has brought on record a ledger maintained by him, the pages of which have been exhibited as Ex DE-1/N. I have myself tallied the entries made therein along with the entries in Ex DW 6/1, EX DW 6/2 and Ex DW6/3, the statement of account of accused proved by his Banker DW6. According to me, the fact that some of the entries in the aforementioned documents do tally, show that the ledger was maintained by the accused in his ordinary course of business and by virtue of Section 34, Evidence Act, it can be read in evidence. This ledger shows that the cheque in dispute was issued by the accused in favour of the complainant in February 96 and not on 28.03.97 as is being alleged by the complainant. The deposition of PW 1 to the extent that the cheque was handed over in Delhi on 28.03.97 and the fact of its presentation on 28.03.07 at Coimbatore, being totally inconsistent with each other, also falsify the stand of the complainant with respect to the date of receipt of the cheque. According to me, accused is rightly contending that as on 28.03.07 the complainant had no authority to fill up a cheque given in February 96, as a reasonable period had elapsed thereafter. The judgment reported as ''Griffiths vs Dalton (1940) Kings Bench Division clearly supports this contention of the accused. It lays down that an undated cheque can be filled up by the creditor within a reasonable period of time and the question what is a reasonable period of time within which an undated cheque can be filled up, is a question that depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case. In the admitted facts and circumstances of the present case namely that the loan was disbursed in April/May 95 & was repayable within on year, the complainant had in its possession shares of accused which it had a right to sell if the accused failed to make payment with in a year, the huge amount of interest that accumulated between the date and issuance of cheque in February 96 and before its presentation in 28.03.97, I am inclined to hold that a reasonable period of time had elapsed after the cheque was issued in February and that the complainant had no authority to fill it up on 28.03.97 35.Now coming to the amount that has been filled up in the cheque, according to Ld. counsel for complainant the accused had executed three promissory notes Ex DE1/A to 1/C, in favour of the complainant, expressly agreeing therein to pay interest @ 26.78% on the principle amount and therefore the amount of Rs. 9,99,301/- was filled up in the cheque after calculating the interest @ 26.78% p.a. on the principle amount. As discussed herein above accused has taken a contention that the promissory notes have been materially altered by the complainant as the date and the rate of interest were inserted in the promissory notes after their execution. To support his contention the accused has pointed out that PW 1 in his cross examination and in the admission/denial of the promissory notes carried out by him with respect to the promissory notes, has admitted that the promissory notes were written and attested by him. He has further admitted that in none of the promissory notes, rate of interest was written by him and in two of the promissory notes namely Ex DE 1/B and 1/C, the dates were not written by him, though all the promissory notes, as per his admission were executed by accused in his presence in Delhi. In other words the only inference that can be drawn from the cross examination and the admission and denial carried out by this witness is that, the date of promissory notes and the rate of interest were inserted in the promissory notes by the complainant on its own after their execution. 36.Further there can not be any presumption raised against the accused in this regard and the authorities/judgments relied upon by the accused would be applicable, since the complainant by filling up the cheque amount as per the term of the promissory notes is clearly suing on the basis of the promissory notes. Thus as per the law laid down in the judgments AIR 1974 MADRAS 4 and AIR 1982 KANT.227, it was clearly for the complainant to have proved that the rate of interest @ 26.78 % p.a. was filled in the promissory notes with the consent of the accused. The Hon'ble High Court, Karnataka in one of its judgment reported as N. Narayanaswamy vs Madanlal, AIR (1982) Karnataka 227, has held that : ''Where in a printed pro note form all the particulars were filled up but the interest column was left blank it was not an incomplete document under S. 20 of the Negotiable Instruments Act entitling the promisee to fill it up since S. 80 made a specific provision that in such a case interest at 6% p.a. was payable. The filling up of the note by the promisee without the consent of the promisor would render it void under S. 87.'' 37)I am unable to accept the contention of the Ld. Counsel for complainant that as per the agreement Ex DE - 1/D or as per the prevalent practices the complainant had the absolute right to decide the rate of interest unilaterally and fill up the same in the promissory notes without even informing the accused about the same. The fact that the accused has not also been able to prove that the rate of interest agreed was 22 % p.a. and not 26.78%, does not ipso facto imply that the complainant's assertion that it was 26.78% p.a. without any proof in support thereof is to be accepted. 38)Therefore in my considered opinion the complainant has failed to prove that the amount of Rs. 9,99,301/- was filled up in the cheque with the consent of the accused. 39)Further apart from the above discussed lacunae, in my considered opinion even if the contention of the complainant with respect to the rate of interest being 26.78% p.a. is accepted, even then the complaint has to fail because of another very material lacunae. Admittedly the accused had paid an amount of Rs. 25,000/- to the complainant in the month of March and May 1996. DW6, R. K. Anand, Official, Oriental Bank of Commerce, Rajender Nagar, in his deposition has stated that as per the statement of account, Ex. DW 6/6, on 22.3.96 an amount of Rs. 20,020/- was paid to the complainant vide cheque bearing No. 501444 and on 04.05.96 another amount of Rs. 5,000- was paid to the complainant by the accused vide cheque bearing No. 508727. His deposition has not been questioned at all. Now if the accused is given the credit of these payments made by him in March and May 1996 and even if the interest is calculated @ 26.78%, (as is contended by the complainant), the amount due from the accused as on 28.3.97 does not total up to Rs. 9,99,301/-. According to the accused Ex DE 1/I is the statement of account filed by the complainant in one of civil suit pending between the parties - though it is rightly contended by the counsel for complainant that this document has not been proved by the accused as per the rules of Evidence Act, however according to me this document merely contains mathematical calculation of the amount due from the accused and the same can be considered in evidence since no discrepancy in the calculations made therein have been pointed out to me by the Ld. Counsel for complainant. The calculation made therein clearly shows that the complainant arrived at the figure of Rs. 9,99,301/-, as the amount due from the accused, without giving him any credit of the payments made by him in March and May 1996. Admittedly there was no other transaction between the parties where the payment made by the accused could not have been credited. In other words, the amount due from the accused as on 28.03.97 was less then Rs. 9,99,301/-and therefore in my considered opinion the complainant could not have been said to have any authority to fill up the cheque for an amount, in excess of the liability of the accused. 40)Ld. Counsel for complainant has tried to contend that even if the credit of the payments made by the accused in the year 1996 has not been given to him, that itself does not make the present complaint not maintainable. For this contention he has relied upon a judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka reported as R. Gopikuttan Pillai vs Sankara Narayanan Nair, Equivalent citation:I(204)BC34. In the said judgment the Hon'ble High Court has held that a part payment made by the accused towards the cheque in dispute, whether before or after the legal notice, can not absolve the accused of the culpability of the offence u/s 138 NI Act. I have gone through the said judgment. According to me the judgment is not at all applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case. The facts before the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka were that a post dated cheque for Rs. 72,750/- dt./ 19.09.93 had been issued by the accused to the complainant and the accused had made some part payments before the actual date of the cheque in dispute. It was in those circumstances that the Hon'ble High Court has held that a part payment will not absolve the accused of the culpability u/s.138 NI Act. The cheque in the case before the Hon'ble High Court was duly filled in at the time of its issuance and on the date of its issuance the accused admitted that he would have to pay Rs. 72,750/- on 19.9.93, (the date of the cheque in dispute). The facts of the present case, which have been discussed at length here in above, clearly are distinguishable - the complainant has on its own filled up Rs. 9,99,301/- on 28.03.07, even after realising that this was not the amount due from the accused as on 28.3.97. Thus it can by no stretch on imagination be stated that the complainant has rightly filled up the cheque on 28.03.97 without the cheque amount being due from the accused as on that date. I am supported in my view by the judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka in the matter reported as M/.s Shreyas Agro Services Pvt. Ltd vs Chandrakumar S. B., 2006 CRL L.J. 3140. The Hon'ble High Court has held that : ''If the drawee were to dishonestly fill up any excess liability and the extent of liability if it becomes bona fide matter of civil dispute in such case, the drawer has no obligation to facilitate the encashment of cheque and the dishonour of cheque under such circumstances does not attract prosecution u/S 138 NI Act'' 41. In view of my discussions hereinabove the dishonour of the cheque in the circumstances of the present case does not at all attract the provisions of the section 138 NI Act. In view thereof accused is hereby acquitted for the offence u/s 138 NI Act. His bail bond stands cancelled, surety stands discharged, endorsement on the documents if any be cancelled as per rules. File be consigned to Record Room. Announced in the open court on 05.03.2007. (Anu Grover Baliga) Metropolitan Magistrate New Delhi
