DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG143

TITLE: Page No. 1 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta vs . Vandana Das on 9 September, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/125056667/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, page, dhiraj, gupta, vandana, september, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

1 IN THE COURT OF VIDHI GUPTA, METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE (NI ACT) (EAST), KARKARDOOMA COURTS: SHAHDARA, DELHI. JUDGMENT U/S 355 Cr.PC a. Serial No. of the case : VK­1265/08 b. Date of the commission of the offence : 07/02/2008 c. Name of the complainant : Dhiraj Gupta d. Name of accused person and his parentage: Smt. Vandana Das, and residence W/o Sh. P. C. Das, R/o Flat No. 9024, C­9, Pocket Vasant Kunj, New Delhi­70. e. Offence complained of : Dishonoring of cheque for "Funds Insufficient". f. Plea of the accused and his examination (if any): Not guilty because she did not take any loan from the complainant. g. Final Order : Held not guilty. Acquitted. h. Order reserved on : 01.09.2014. i. Order pronounced on : 09.09.2014 Page No. 1 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das 2 Brief reasons for decision:­ 1. Brief facts necessary for the disposal of this case are that on 02.02.2008, a complaint was filed by the Complainant under section 138 & 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act (NI Act), whereby cognizance was taken for the offence under section 138 of the NI Act and accused was summoned before this Court. 2. It has been alleged in the Complaint that in the first week of July 2007, accused and her husband, Sh. P. C. Das, approached the complainant for a loan of Rs. 2,00,000/­ towards a firm i.e. M/s O. P. Insulation Pvt. Ltd., whose authorized signatory is Sh. P. C. Das, for clearing the dues of MCD parking at South Extension­II, New Delhi. It is stated that the said loan was to be repaid within a period of six months with interest @ 12 % per annum. It is alleged that the said loan was given by the complainant by way of pay order bearing number 450995 dt. 06.07.2007 for an amount of Rs. 2,00,000/­ in favour of Commissioner MCD, Delhi. The said pay order is stated to be issued from complainant's account held in South Indian Bank Ltd., Mayur Vihar­I, Delhi. It is stated that the pay order was received by the accused's driver namely Mr. Sharma on 06.07.2007 which was deposited in the MCD and the pay order was cleared in the name of MCD vide receipt Ex. CW1/A. It is further stated that on 06.12.2007, accused issued a cheque bearing number 767676 dt. 07.12.2007 for an amount of Rs. 1,00,000/­ Ex. CW1/B drawn on Punjab and Sindh Bank, West Page No. 2 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das Patel Nagar, New Delhi, for part payment of the due amount. However, the said cheque was dishonoured and returned vide bank memo dt. 11.12.2007 Ex. CW1/C with the reason "Funds Insufficient". It is further stated that when the complainant again approached the accused for clearing the dues, the accused issued a cheque amount of Rs. 2,00,000/­ bearing number 767679 drawn on Punjab and Sindh Bank, West Patel Nagar, Delhi Ex. CW1/D. However, again the said cheque was dishonoured and returned vide bank memo dt. 08.01.2008 Ex. CW1/E with the reason "Funds Insufficient". Thereafter, it is submitted that in spite of various demands made by the complainant the accused did not pay the due amount and a legal demand notice dt. 22.01.2008 Ex. CW1/K (Exhibited in Red Ink) was served on the accused vide registered post Ex. CW1/G, UPC Ex. CW1/H and courier receipt Ex. CW1/I & CW1/J. It is stated that despite service of legal demand notice no assurance for payment has been made by the accused and hence the present complaint case has been filed by the complainant. 3. Perusal of the file reveals that on 11.01.2011, plea of defence on behalf of the accused was recorded, however, no formal notice of accusation was framed against the accused. Thereafter, evidence was led by both the parties and it was only at the stage of final arguments that it was discovered on the file that a formal notice had not been previously framed. Vide order dt. 17.04.2014 both the parties submitted that the notice of accusation be framed and in view of the same, notice was framed against the accused under Section Page No. 3 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das 138 NI Act on 17.04.2014, to which she pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Both the parties vide their separate statement adopted all the previously recorded testimony and evidence on record for the purpose of decision of this case. In her plea of defence accused stated that she has not taken any loan from the complainant. It is further submitted by her that she had issued a blank signed cheque to the complainant as complainant was doing parking contract business in association with her. She stated that she had given a blank signed cheque to the accused for depositing parking licence fee with MCD and the said cheque was misused by the complainant by filing the present complaint case. 4. To prove his case, the Complainant adopted his pre­summoning affidavit Ex. CW1/K (Exhibited in Blue Ink) as his post summoning evidence and examined himself as CW1. Thereafter, CE was closed. 5. Statement of the accused has been recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C on 18.10.2012, wherein the accused stated that though the cheque in question bears her signature and account number, she does not remember whether she had filled the body of cheque in question or not. She further stated the she had handed over 6 / 7 cheques including cheque in question to the complainant at his request who wanted to do parking business with her, which could not be started. She has also stated that her daughter or her servant had received legal demand notice issued by the complainant. 6. In order to prove her innocence, the accused examined herself as DW1. Page No. 4 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das 7. I have heard the arguments of both the parties at length and have gone through the entire record carefully. 8. The first and foremost issue which needs to be decided here pertains to the maintainability of the Complaint itself as has been raised by the Counsel for the Accused on the ground that for the present complaint premature cognizance has been taken by the Court before the expiry of the statutory period of 15 days after service of legal demand notice upon the accused, as required under section 138 of the NI Act. 9. On perusal of record it is revealed that the courier receipt as well as the postal receipts and UPC, all are dated 22.01.2008 and the cognizance of the Complaint has been taken on 04.02.2008, which is certainly within the above stated statutory period. Nevertheless, the congnizance has been taken in this matter and the case has gone ahead on merits for almost 7 years. It may be noted that even the Accused has raised this issue only at the time of final arguments. Moreover, we need to examine this issue in the light of decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court of India as well as the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. A recent judgment of the Apex Court wherein this issue had been discussed is titled as Yogendra Pratap Singh vs. Savitri Pandey & Anr.[2012 (2) CIJ 689] wherein on account of the divergent views of two coordinate benches as well as that of various High Courts on the issue pertaining to premature complaints, the same has been referred to a Higher Bench for exposition of law. At this stage, it becomes relevant here to refer to the decision of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi Page No. 5 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das in case titled Zenith Fashion Makers (P) Ltd. vs. Ultimate Fashion Makers Ltd. & Anr.[2005 (3) LRC 203 (Del)] wherein referring to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case titled Narsingh Das Tapadia vs. Goverdhan Das Partani and Anr. [2000 (2) JCC (SC) 615], it was held that: 4. Keeping in view this judgment of the Supreme Court, the complainant could have been entirely safe if the Magistrate had waited for the period of 15 days to lapse. The question, therefore, is whether the complaint can be quashed on this ground. It is clear from the above narration that complaint, even though filed before the maturity of the cause of action, could not have been quashed only on that ground. The additional factor that has taken place in this case is the cognizance by the Magistrate. Can this action of the Magistrate damage the right of the complainant? Can an action of the court defeat the legitimate claim of the complainant to prosecute the accused for the offence? As said earlier the situation would have been entirely safe had the Magistrate waited for three more days before taking cognizance. 5. In my opinion, the action of the court or in other words the mistake of the M.M. cannot defeat the claim of the complainant. It cannot be lost sight of the fact that if the order of the Magistrate is set aside now no fresh complaint under Section 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act can be brought in view of the provisions of the limitation prescribed under Section 142 of the Negotiable Instrument Act. Therefore, the complainant, in that eventuality, will be denied the right to justice for no fault of his own. It has to be noticed that no prejudice of any kind has been caused to the petitioner by taking a pre­mature action. The mere technical flaw cannot be allowed to defeat the ends of justice. Page No. 6 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das 10. It is also pertinent to note herein that there it is not the plea of the Accused that she would have paid the cheque amount to the Complainant had the above stated statutory period of 15 days been complied with. In fact, the Accused is disputing her liability under the cheque in question and has also set­ up a defence to prove her case. In these circumstances, without deliberating upon this issue any further, I deem it appropriate to go ahead with the appreciation of evidence and decision of this case on merits. 11. Moving ahead, it is now for this Court to examine the case on the evidence brought forth by the parties. The signature on the cheque in question as well as handing over of the same to the Complainant by the Accused has specifically been admitted by the Accused no.1, albeit the purpose for handing it over has been disputed which shall be the core of the decision in this case. While the Complainant states that he had advanced a loan in favour of the Accused; the Accused states that the cheque handed over by her to the Complainant in respect of some business transaction has been misused by him. As to which version is true out of the two stated above, can be determined only by careful perusal of record and due scrutiny of evidence. 12. The peculiarity of this case lies in the fact that loan has not been alleged to be directly advanced to the Accused, rather the Complainant submits that loan was advanced by way of a pay order in favour of Commissioner, MCD, Delhi towards clearing of MCD dues of M/s O. P. Insulation Pvt. Ltd. for the parking at South Extension­II, New Delhi. It is surprising that instead of handing Page No. 7 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das over the loan directly to the Accused, the Complainant decided to get the amount of Rs.2,00,000/­ deposited with the MCD on behalf of the Accused. Hence, primarily, as per the admission of the Complainant himself, the loan amount has never been handed over to the Accused. The liability of the Accused to pay the loan amount, which was never handed over by the Complainant to the Accused, itself therefore becomes questionable. 13. Moreover, it may be noted here that as per his own complaint, the Complainant has stated that Sh. P. C. Das and Mrs. Vandana Das had approached the Complainant for a loan of Rs. 2,00,000/­ towards a firm "M/s O. P. Insulation Pvt. Ltd." whose Authorised Signatory (Director) is Mr. P.C. Das, for clearing the dues of MCD Parking situated at South Extension­II, New Delhi. Company has been made Accused no. 2 in the Complaint. However, despite advancing the loan in favour of the Company and having knowledge regarding Sh. P. C. Das being the authorized signatory of the Company, he has not been made an Accused in the complaint. No document has been brought on record by the Complainant to prove that the Accused no. 1 i.e. Mrs. Vandana Das is in fact a Director/Authorized signatory of the Accused Company or that the cheque has been issued by her on behalf of the Company. In sum total, a confusion is created in the stand taken by the Complainant whereby if he alleges that the loan was advanced to the Accused no. 2 i.e. the Company, then without proving that Accused no. 1 is the Director or authorized signatory of the company, she cannot be made liable and if he alleges that loan was advanced to Accused no. 1 in her Page No. 8 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das personal capacity, then Accused no. 2 i.e. the Company cannot be made liable. 14. Moreover, Accused no.1 has specifically stated in her testimony as DW1 that she has no connection whatsoever with M/s O. P. Insulation Pvt. Ltd. i.e. Accused no. 2. No negative suggestion has been put to the Accused regarding this statement by the Counsel for the Complainant whereby the same can be deemed to have been admitted. This leads to glaring loop­holes in the story put forward by the Complainant. 15. Moving ahead, the complaint states that the said pay order was received by the Driver of the Accused i.e. Mr. Sharma on 06.07.2007. However, no further details of said Mr. Sharma have either been mentioned in the Complaint or in the evidence brought by the Complainant. This alleged handing over of the pay­order to the driver is in fact the most important link in the chain of events leading to establishment of case of the Complainant. However, the complainant has neither chosen to bring said Mr. Sharma to depose as a witness nor has his name been mentioned in the list of witnesses filed by the Complainant along with his Complaint. Also, the very authenticity of the transaction of handing over of the pay order is brought under serious doubt as this missing link creates a wide gap in the story of the Complainant. Another striking feature of this transaction is that though the Complainant states that the pay­order was handed over by him to the driver of the Accused, the receipt for the deposit of the said pay­order has been filed by the Complainant with his complaint as Ex. CW1/A. If the pay­order was indeed handed over to the driver Page No. 9 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das who deposited the same with the MCD, then as to how did the receipt come into the possession of the Complainant has nowhere been explained by him in his Complaint. 16. Further, the Complainant states that one cheque for an amount of Rs. 1,00,000/­ (Ex. CW/B) was issued by the Accused in favour of the Complainant towards part­payment of loan amount which got dishonoured on account of insufficiency of funds. The ultimate fate of that cheque, i.e. whether it was returned back to the Accused or destroyed by the Complainant himself has nowhere been mentioned. 17. Again, it is important to note that in regard to the same dishonoured cheque, two legal notices have been exhibited in evidence; one by the Complainant himself as Ex. CW1/K(red ink) and the other has been brought on record by the Accused while cross­examining the Complainant which is Ex. CW1/D1. Further, it is pertinent to note that the legal demand notice Ex. CW1/K(red ink) had not been originally filed on record by the Complainant along with his Complaint but it was brought on record vide an application under section 311 Cr.P.C. dt. 25.07.2012, which is after closing of Complainant's evidence. Both the legal notices i.e. Ex. CW1/K(red ink) and Ex. CW1/D1 have been admitted by the Complainant to be the same legal notice which was sent by him to the Accused. However, it is interesting to note that on complete reading of both the legal notices it is noticeable that they are not the copies of each other rather differences can be made out in the contents. Hence, the suggestion put by Page No. 10 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das the Counsel for the Accused to the Complainant that alterations and manipulations have been made in Ex. CW1/K, does gain weight. 18. On the other hand, if we examine the depositions and testimony of the Accused no. 1 in this case, i.e. her plea of defence, her statement under section 313 Cr.P.C. and her testimony as a defence witness, discrepancies can be found therein as well. Even though the plea of Defence of the Accused and her statement under section 313 Cr.P.C. are not to be read in evidence, nevertheless, they can be looked into for the purpose of corroborating the Defence Evidence. 19. Accused no.1 has constantly changed her stand pertaining to the receipt of legal demand notice. While in her statement under section 313 Cr.P.C. dated 18.10.2012, she has stated that: My daughter or my servant has received legal demand notice issued by the Complainant. While deposing as DW1, she has stated in her examination­in­chief that: I did not receive any legal demand notice issued by the Complainant. However, the Ex. CW1/D1 which has been put to the Complainant in his cross­examination by the Counsel for the Accused is suggested to be the legal notice received by the Accused. Page No. 11 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das 20. In her plea of defence, the Accused has stated that she had issued Blank Signed Cheques to the Complainant with respect to some parking contract business which have been misused by him. However, in her statement under section 313 Cr.P.C. she has stated that she had given 6­7 cheques to the Complainant and also that she did not remember whether she had filled the body of the cheque in question or not, which implies that the cheques need to necessarily have been blank signed cheques. However, in her testimony as DW1 she has averred that she had handed over 10 signed bank cheques to the Complainant. 21. After requisite perusal of record and detailed examination of the evidence brought on record, it is not in doubt that neither of the parties has been able to set up a version which can be believed to be totally true. However, it becomes crucial at this stage to read into the principles of criminal jurisprudence thoroughly which set up a yard­stick for weighing the evidence brought by the Complainant and the Accused in support of their cases. In the case titled Krishna Janardhan Bhat vs. Dattatraya G. Hegde [(2008) 4 SCC 54] it was held that: 25. Furthermore, whereas prosecution must prove the guilt of an accused beyond all reasonable doubt, the standard of proof so as to prove a defence on the part of an accused is preponderance of probabilities. Inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only from the materials brought on records by the parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies. 26. A statutory presumption has an evidentiary value. The Page No. 12 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das question as to whether the presumption whether stood rebutted or not, must, therefore, be determined keeping in view the other evidences on record. For the said purpose, stepping into the witness box by the appellant is not imperative. In a case of this nature, where the chances of false implication cannot be ruled out, the background fact and the conduct of the parties together with their legal requirements are required to be taken into consideration. ............................... 34. We are not oblivious of the fact that the said provision has been inserted to regulate the growing business, trade, commerce and industrial activities of the country and the strict liability to promote greater vigilance in financial matters and to safeguard the faith of the creditor in the drawer of the cheque which is essential to the economic life of a developing country like India. This, however, shall not mean that the courts shall put a blind eye to the ground realities. Statute mandates raising of presumption but it stops at that. It does not say how presumption drawn should be held to have rebutted. Other important principles of legal jurisprudence, namely presumption of innocence as human rights and the doctrine of reverse burden introduced by Section 139 should be delicately balanced. Such balancing acts, indisputably would largely depend upon the factual matrix of each case, the materials brought on record and having regard to legal principles governing the same. 22. The decision making for this case, had been stated to be dependent on the purpose of handing over of the cheque in question. The Complainant has not been able to prove either the legally dischargeable in respect of the cheque in question or that the cheque was handed over to him by the Accused no.1 in discharge of the liability as alleged by him. On the contrary, the Accused has set up a defence which is sufficient for this case to rebut the presumptions raised Page No. 13 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das against her as well as Accused no. 2. 23. In view of the above discussion and principles of law cited above, both the Accused i.e. Mrs. Vandana Das as well as M/s O. P. Insulation Pvt. Ltd. are hereby acquitted for the offence under section 138 of NI Act. Announced in the open court (VIDHI GUPTA) th on 09 Day of September, 2014. MM/KKD/Delhi This judgment contains 14 signed pages. Page No. 14 To 14 Dhiraj Gupta Vs. Vandana Das
