DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG091

TITLE: In The Court Of Ms.Riya Guha vs Brief Facts Of The Present Case Are ... on 25 June, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/108880998/



DOMAIN: Criminal Law

SUBDOMAIN: Criminal Justice

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, court, riya, guha, brief, facts, present, case, june, financial, criminal law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF Ms.RIYA GUHA, MM­02 ( NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT) CENTRAL DISTRICT, TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI M/S Aneja Agencies B­14, (FF), Sangam Market, Katra Neel , Chandni Chowk, Delhi Through its partner Mr. Gurpreet Singh ......Complainant Versus 1. M/S R.K. Apparels 17­A/2B, W.E.A, Ajmal Khan Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi Through its partner/proprietor Mr. Arun Singhal 1. Mr. Arun Singhal, Proprietor Authorized signatory M/S R.K. Apparels 17­A/2B, W.E.A, Ajmal Khan Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi ........Accused JUDGMENT Complainant Case No : 2526/1/11 Date of institution : 29/09/2009 Offence alleged : Under Section 138 N.I. Act Plea of the accused : Not pleaded guilty Final order : Conviction Date of Decision : 25/06/2014 BRIEF FACTS 1. Brief facts of the present case are that complainant is a registered partnership firm and the present complaint is filed by Sh.Gurpreet Singh, one CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 1 of 15 of the partners. It is further stated that the complainant is a wholesale distributer of suitings and shirtings and that the accused no.2 Arun Singhal is the proprietor of the accused no.1 firm, and that he used to purchase goods/fabrics from the complainant firm from time to time on credit basis. It is further allaged that as per the books of accounts maintained by the complainant in the name of the accused no.1, a sum of Rs.1,68,553/­ was due and payable by the accused to the complainant, which was inclusive of part interest. In order to discharge the above said liability, the accused no.2 issued three post dated cheques bearing cheque no. 341517 dated 28­01­ 2009 of amount Rs.50,000/­, cheque no. 341518 dated 28­02­2009 of amount Rs.50,000/­ and, cheque no.341519 dated 28­03­2009 of amount Rs.68,553/­, all drawn on Syndicate Bank, Ajmal Khan Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi and the same are Ex.CW1/4 to Ex.CW1/6. The complainant presented the cheques in question for encashment through his banker but the same was got dishonored by the banker of accused with the remarks "Funds Insufficient" vide returning memos dated 29.07.2009 which are Ex.CW1/7 to Ex.CW1/9. Hence, the complainant issued the mandatory notice U/s 138 NI Act dated 13­08­2009 i.e. Ex.CW1/10 and the same was served upon the accused vide postal receipts/registered AD and U.P.C. The same are Ex.CW1/11 to Ex.CW1/13. 2. When the accused failed to fulfill the conditions of the said legal notice CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 2 of 15 Ex.CW1/10 within 15 days of its presumed service, then the complainant has filed the present complaint case U/s 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (hereinafter the Act) against the accused. 3. After the institution of the present complaint, the complainant adduced his pre summoning evidence U/s 200 Cr. P.C. on which basis the accused was summoned via order dated 09­10­2009 to face trial for the offence U/s 138 NI Act. After the service of the summons, the accused entered his appearance whereupon the provisions of Sec. 207 Cr. P.C. were also complied. The accused was admitted to bail and the notice U/s 251 Cr. P.C. for the offence U/s 138 NI Act was served upon accused Arun Singhal on 15­ 12­2010 after hearing the contesting parties. The accused pleaded "Not Guilty" and claimed trial. He further stated in his plea of defence that the cheques in question were given as security and that no amount is due and payable by the firm RK Apparels. He further stated that the statement of account filed by the complainant is incorrect and that the complainant has not placed the complete record. He further stated that as per the records of the accused firm, the complainant is liable to pay to the accused and that the cheques in question were issued without consideration. 4. In order to substantiate the case of the complainant, Sh.Gurpreet Singh, the partner in the complainant firm examined himself as the witness CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 3 of 15 CW­1 and adopted the presummoning evidence as his examination in chief, the contents of which are a mere repetition of what had already been mentioned above and hence are not repeated for the sake of brevity. The CW­1 was duly cross­examined by the counsel for the accused. 5. The matter was thereafter fixed for statement of the accused and the same was recorded on 22­08­2012. All the incriminating circumstances, appearing in the evidence against the accused were put in order to unable him to offer his explanation. In his explanation u/sec 313 Cr.P.C r/w sec 281 Cr.P.C, the accused Arun Singhal stated that the cheques Ex.CW1/4 to Ex.CW1/6 were given as a security to the complainant and that there is no outstanding payable to the complainant. It was further stated by accused Arun Singhal that an amount of Rs.6 lakhs was made to the complainat by way of cheque which the complainant had illegally adjusted in the account of Ahuja Apparels Pvt. Ltd. 6. Despite sufficient opportunity the accused has not lead any defence and finally the defence was closed by the order of the Court on 17­12­2013. Thereafter, final arguments were advanced. I have also perused the record. 7. For the offence under Section 138 NI Act to be made out against the accused, the complainant must prove the following points that: CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 4 of 15 (a) The accused issued a cheque on an account maintained by him with a bank. (b) The said cheque had been issued in discharge, in whole or in part, of any legal debt or other liability. (c) The said cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date of the cheque or within the period of its validity. (d) The aforesaid cheque, when presented for encashment, was returned unpaid /dishonoured. (e) The payee of the cheque issued a legal notice of demand to the drawer within 30 days from the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque. (f) The drawer of the cheque failed to make the payment within 15 days of the receipt of aforesaid legal notice of demand. 8. Hence, the complainant must firstly show that the cheque in question was issued by the accused in its favour. Hence, firstly, the complainant must prove that the accused had issued the impugned cheques Ex.CW1/4 to Ex.CW1/6 in its favour. There is no denial by the accused that the signatures on the cheques in question are not his or that the account was not of the accused firm. However, the accused has alleged that he did not have the liability in respect of the said cheques as they were issued in lieu of security. CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 5 of 15 9. During the cross examination, the CW1 stuck to his stand that the cheques in question were issued by the accused in discharge of liability due and payable towards the complainant. To prove the stand of the accused, Ld. Counsel for the accused put questions to the CW1 that the complainant had received six cheques totalling upto Rs. 6 lakhs dated from 10/06/2007 to 26/06/2007. The CW1 affirmed to such suggestion but he also clarified that such cheques totalling upto Rs. 6 lakhs were issued in order to discharge the liability of M/S Ahuja Apparels Ltd. However, he also admitted that these cheques totalling upto Rs. 6 lakhs were issued by M/S R.K. Apparels from its bank account. The CW1 further went on to state that he had been given oral communication that the said cheques of Rs. 6 lakhs be adjusted against the dues of M/s Ahuja Apparels. With such questioning, the accused had tried to establish that firstly, with the payment of Rs. 6 lakhs given by way of these six cheques, which by the way were mentioned for the first time only during the cross examination of the CW1, there was no outstanding liability towards M/S R.K. Apparels. Secondly, the accused also tried to prove that the complainant had unjustifiedly and wrongly adjusted the payments made by these six cheques into the account of M/s Ahuja Apparels when they were meant to be issued towards discharge of liability of the accused firm. 10. However it is pertinent to note that these 6 cheques were all dated of CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 6 of 15 the month of June, 2007 whereas the cheques in question Ex.CW1/4 to Ex.CW1/6 were dated 28/01/2009, 28/02/2009 and 28/03/2009. Apart from such questioning, the accused has not been able to show that the cheques in question were issued as security. No statement of account of the accused firm has been produced . It is an admitted position that the complainant firm and the accused firm were having ongoing business transactions. Merely by questioning the CW1 that he has received certain sundry cheques would not tantamount to rebutting the presumption in favour of the complainant that the three cheques in question Ex. CW1/4 to Ex. CW1/6 were issued in lieu of discharge of legally enforceable liability and the same were issued against consideration. 11. The presumptions provided U/s 118 NI Act and 139 NI Act would come to the rescue of the complainant once the execution of the cheque in question is proved on record. As per section 118 NI Act, it is to be presumed in favour of the complainant during the trial that the cheque in question was given against consideration by the accused and that the complainant was the holder of the said cheque in due course. Further as per Sec. 139 NI Act, it is to be presumed in favour of the complainant during the trial that the cheque in question was received by the complainant against a legally enforceable debt or liability ("Rangappa Vs. Sri Mohan" SLP (Crl.) 407/06, Dated:­ 07.05.2010). CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 7 of 15 12. In order to have the positive outcome in his favour, the complainant was required to show that the cheques in question Ex.CW1/4 to Ex.CW1/6 were given by the accused to discharge his liabilities which was dishonoured via returning memo whereafter the accused had also failed to comply with the requirements of the legal notice Ex. CW1/10. On the other hand, the accused was required to show his defence on the scale of preponderance of the probabilities that he is not liable to pay the amount involved in the present case to the complainant. 13. It is well settled that both the aforesaid presumptions U/s 118 & 139 NI Act are rebuttable in nature and the onus to rebut the same squarely rests upon the accused. The accused can rebut these presumptions not merely by examining his own witnesses but also through the cross­examination of the complainant and his witnesses thereby bringing on record through the entire evidence available on record (inclusive of complainant's evidence and defence evidence, if any), that the complainant has set up a false case, and that their was no existing liabilities between the parties and that the cheque in question was misused. It must be kept in mind that once evidence is brought on record from both sides, it becomes an evidence of the case and court can draw inferences from the said entire evidence either in favour or against any of the parties. CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 8 of 15 14. Preponderance of probabilities is the standard of proof upon the accused to rebut the above presumptions, which is not as high as that of the prosecution whereby the accused is only required to show the existence of a probable defence so as to rebut the above presumptions. If the accused succeeds in raising a probable defence by referring to his own evidence (if any) and from the evidence of the complainant, then the onus would shift on to the complainant, who then would have to show beyond reasonable doubt the existence of consideration/existence of a legally recoverable debt or liability in respect of the cheque in question. 15. It is argued by the Ld. counsel for complainant that from evidence on record, the complainant has proved that cheques in question were signed by the accused which were dishonoured vide bank memos and despite the legal notice accused did not make the payment. It is argued that during the cross examination of complainant nothing material has come out and the complainant has been able to prove his case. It is further argued that accused has failed to discharge the burden upon him to rebutt the presumption in favour of the complainant under the Act. 16. Now the question is whether the complainant proved his case, that whether the amount was legally enforceable debt. Offence under Section CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 9 of 15 138 of the Act is a technical offence and the complainant is only supposed to prove that the cheques issued by the accused were dishonoured, his statement that cheques were issued against liability or debt is sufficient proof of the debt or liability and the onus shifts to the accused to show the circumstances under which the cheques were issued and this could be proved by the accused only by way of cogent evidence. 17. The Ld. Counsel for accused had argued that the the document Ex.CW1/3, that is the statement of account, is a manufactured document and the payment of Rs.6 lakhs has not been reflected in this document. He further argued that there was no written instructions from the accused's side to adjust the amount of Rs.6 lakhs in the account of Ahuja Apparels. 18. Accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The accused may adduce direct evidence/evidence on preponderance of probabilities to prove that cheques in question were not supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be discharged by him. However, there is no need that the accused should disprove the non existence of consideration and debt by leading direct evidence because the existence of negative evidence is neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time it is clear that bare denial of the passing of the consideration and existence of debt, apparently CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 10 of 15 would not serve the purpose of the accused. Something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the complainant. 19. The plea of the defence raised by the accused at different stages are inconsistence and contrary to each other. At the time of framing of notice, accused had raised the defence that he has issued the cheques in question to the complainant as a security. During the statement under Section 313 CrPC and during the cross examination of the complainant, the accused has raised the defence that an amount of Rs.6 lakhs was given to the complainant by way of cheque(s), but the complainant had illegally adjusted the amount in the account of the other entity, M/S Ahuja Apparels. 20. Therefore the inconsistent and improved version of defence raised by the accused does not inspire any confidence and does not hold water because the accused has improved his plea of defence at the every stage of trial. 21. In a landmark judgment V.S. Yadav Vs. Reena Crl A No.1136 of 2010 Decided on 21.09.2010 it is observed by Hon'ble High Court of Delhi that a bare definition of cheque shows that cheque is a bill of exchange drawn on specified banker and is an order by drawer on his own agent i.e CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 11 of 15 bank for payment of certain sum of money to the bearer or the order to person in whose favour cheque is drawn. This order of payment by person to the holder of cheque is not made in casual manner just for the sake of fun. This order is made for consideration and that is why Section 139 of NI Act provides that the holder of a cheque is presumed to have received the cheque in discharge of whole or in part of a debt or liability. It was sufficient for complainant to prove the debt and liability by making a statement that the cheques were issued by the respondent for payment of debt. It is further observed that it must be borne in mind that the statement of accused under Section 281 Cr.P.C. Or under section 313 Cr.P.C. is not the evidence of the accused and it cannot be read as part of evidence. The accused has an option to examine himself as a witness. Where the accused does not examine himself as a witness, his statement 281 Cr.P.C. or 313 Cr.P.C. cannot be read as evidence of accused and it has to be looked into only as an explanation of the incriminating circumstances and not as evidence. There is no presumption of law that explanation given by the accused was truthful. 22. If the accused wanted to prove any of the above said plea of defence, he was supposed to appear in the witness box and testify and get himself subjected to cross examination. His explanation that the cheque in question was issued as security and that he has no liability towards CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 12 of 15 complainant qua the cheques in question is not proved by evidence and this is liable to be rejected since the accused did not appear in the witness box to dispel the presumption in favour of the cheque as provided under the Act. Mere suggestion to the complainant or mere explanation given in that statement of accused under section 313 Cr.P.C r/w Section 281 Cr.P.C, does not amount to proof. Therefore the plea as set up is only after thought and is having no factual basis. Hence, the defence version of the accused is suspicious and is unbelievable. 23. The accused has also argued that he has not been served with the legal demand notice. However, the legal demand notice dated 13­08­2009 Ex.CW1/10 was sent to the same address of the accused Arun Singhal which is also mentioned in the memo of the parties of the present case. The accused never disputed the said address at any stage of the trial. Hence in present scenario, there is presumption in favour of the complainant U/s 27 of the General Clauses Act. So, I am of considered view of that accused was duly served by legal demand notice. 24. Therefore, mere pleading not guilty and stating that the cheques were issued as security and were wrongly adjusted by the complainant would not amount to rebutting the presumption raised under Section 139 of N.I Act. In the present case accused has not produced any cogent proof in support of CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 13 of 15 the defence version which makes it improbable that the cheque in question was not issued towards the discharge of legal liability as alleged by the complainant but at the same time strengthens the present complaint case. Further, nothing has been proved by the accused to show that he did not have the legally enforceable liability towards the complainant. 25. Having considered the testimonies the issuance of cheque was not in dispute which were dishonored by bank returning memo. Accused Arun Singhal was served with legal notice through registered post within the stipulated period and despite that no payment has been made by him. 26. Reading of the evidence on record in its entirety, would show that the evidence is not supportive with the innocence of the accused and as such same is liable to be dismissed out rightly. Secondly, accused has not produced any cogent proof in support of his defence on record. This court is of the opinion that the defence set up is neither definitive nor consistent with innocence of the accused. It was sole burden and duty of the accused to prove no liability by raising probable defence when he was defending presumption, which was supporting the dishonoured cheque. The accused has failed to discharge the onus. Thus, this court holds that the accused has not been able to rebut the presumptions under section 139 and 118 NI Act standing in favour of complainant. CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 14 of 15 27. Having considered the entire evidence, complainant successfully proved all the essential requirements of Section 138 of the Act. Accordingly, accused is guilty for committing the offence punishable u/s 138 of the Act, he is hereby convicted for the offence under section 138 of the Act. 28. Let he be heard on point of sentence separately on 30.06.2014 Announced in open court on 25.06.2014 (RIYA GUHA) MM (C­02) /Delhi 25.06.2014 CC No. 2526/1/11 M/s Aneja Agencies vs M/S R.K. Apparels 15 of 15
