DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG097

TITLE: Sh. Aman Vij vs . on 18 February, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/41720030/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, aman, february, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI SATVIR SINGH LAMBA, MM-01 ( NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT) WEST DISTRICT, TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI Sh. Aman Vij Proprietor of M/s Aman Services, 7-8, Mohan Garden, Main Najafgarh Road, Uttam Nagar, New Delhi - 110059. ......Complainant Vs. Shri Anand Kumar, Proprietor of M/s Rahul Trading Company, B-3, Kushak Road no.2, Saroop Nagar, New Delhi - 110042. ........Accused JUDGMENT Complainant Case No. : 1283/10 Date of institution : 22.10.2009 Offence alleged : Under Section 138 NI Act Plea of the accused : Not pleaded guilty Final order : Acquittal Date of Decision : 18.02.2014 Brief Facts 1. Brief facts of the case are that the complainant is running the business of electronic trading as well as retailing under the name and style of M/s Aman Services. It is alleged that accused is also engaged in the same trade of electronic goods. It is further alleged that the accused approached the complainant to buy certain electronic goods and that the accused issued Ex.A1 i.e. a cheque no. 686428 dated 27.04.2009 amounting to Rs. 25,750/- drawn on Delhi State Cooperative Bank, Samaypur Badli, Delhi. The complainant presented the cheque in question for encashment through his banker but the same was got dishonored by the bankers of accused with the remarks CC No.1283/1 page no.1/11 "Funds Insufficient" vide returning memo dated 14.09.2009, same is Ex.A. Henceforth, the complainant issued the mandatory notice U/s 138 NI Act dated 23.09.2009 i.e Ex.B and the same was served upon the accused vide postal receipt, AD/U.P.C. and courier i.e. Ex.C and Ex.D. 2. When the accused failed to fulfill the conditions of the said legal notice within 15 days of its presumed service, then the complainant has filed the present complaint case U/s 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (hereinafter the Act) against the accused. Pre-Trial Procedure 3. After the institution of the present complaint, the complainant adduced his pre summoning evidence U/s 200 Cr. P.C. on which basis the accused was summoned via order dated 16.11.2009 to face trial for the offence U/s 138 NI Act. After the service of the summons, the accused entered his appearance whereupon the provisions of Sec. 207 Cr. P.C. Was also complied. 4. The accused was admitted to bail then notice U/s 251 Cr. P.C. for the offence U/s 138 NI Act was served upon the accused on 03.09.2010 after hearing the contesting parties. Needless to say, the accused pleaded "Not Guilty" and claimed trial. Trial 5. In order to substantiate his case, the complainant examined himself as the witness as CW-1 whose contents are a mere repetition of what had already been discussed under the "Brief Facts" and hence are not repeated for the sake of brevity. 6. All the incriminating circumstances, appearing in the evidence against the accused was put in order to unable him to offer his explanation. 7. In his explanation u/sec 313 Cr.P.C r/w sec 281 Cr.P.C, the accused admitted the issuance of the cheque in question to the complainant but explained that CC No.1283/1 page no.2/11 he had already made due payment to the complainant by way of Rs.10,000/- in cash on 27.05.2009 under the due signatures of agent of complainant namely Shri Rajesh and remaining amount was paid through a cheque bearing no. 650948 dated 22.06.2009 for the sum of Rs.15,750/- drawn on Delhi State Cooperative Bank Limited. Accused denied the receiving of legal notice. He lastly stated that he is innocent and is falsely implicated in the present case and the complainant is misusing the cheque in question with malafide intention to gain wrongfully. 8. In order to prove his innocence accused examined Shri Surender, clerk, Delhi State Co-operative Bank Limited, Samaypur, Delhi as DW1 and Shri Mahesh Sharma as DW2. Accused also examined himself as DW3. All the defence witnesses were duly cross examined by the complainant. Thereafter the accused closed his defence evidence vide order dated 14.08.2013 whereupon the trial came to a conclusion and the contesting parties were duly heard. Facts in Issue 9. In order to have the positive outcome in his favour, the complainant was required to show that the cheque in question was given by the accused to discharge his liabilities which was dishonoured via returning memo whereafter the accused had also failed to comply with the requirements of the legal notice. 10. On the other hand, the accused was required to show his defence on the scale of preponderance of the probabilities that he is not liable to the amount involved to the complainant. Legal Prepositions 11. The presumptions provided U/s 118 NI Act and 139 NI Act would come to the rescue of the complainant once the execution of the cheques in question are proved on record. 12. As per section 118 NI Act, it is to be presumed in favour of the complainant during the trial that the cheques in question were given against CC No.1283/1 page no.3/11 consideration by the accused and that the complainant was the holder of the said cheque in due course. Further as per Sec. 139 NI Act, it is to be presumed in favour of the complainant during the trial that the cheques in question were received by the complainant against a legally enforceable debt or liability (Refer :- "Rangappa Vs. Sri Mohan" SLP (Crl.) 407/06, Dated:- 07.05.2010). 13. It is well settled that both the aforesaid presumptions U/s 118 & 139 NI Act are rebuttable in nature and the onus to rebut the same squarely rests upon the accused. 14. The accused can rebut these presumptions not merely by examining his own witnesses but also through the cross examination of the complainant and his witnesses thereby bringing on record through the entire evidence available on record (inclusive of complainant's evidence and defence evidence, if any), that the complainant was a liar, that their was no existing liabilities between the parties and that the cheques in question were misused. It must be kept in mind that once evidence is brought on record from both sides, it becomes an evidence of the case and court can draw inferences from the said entire evidence either in favour or against any of the parties. Evidence is a complainant's evidence and accused's evidence only for the purposes of identifying it, but once it is adduced in the case, it becomes the evidence of the case and then the same has to be read as a whole. The court can not read the evidence of the complainant only to the extent it favours the complainant and overlook the remaining evidence which supports the accused merely on the ground that it is the complainant's evidence. Similarly, from the evidence adduced by the accused, the court can draw inferences either in favour of the complainant or against the accused. The accused has a right to argue his case even on the basis of the cross examination of the complainant & his witnesses to show to the court that there existed no legally recoverable debt or liability between the parties. In order to rebut the legal presumption in question, it emerges that the accused need not require direct evidence to disprove the existence of consideration. 15. Preponderance of probabilities is the standard of proof upon the accused to rebut the above presumptions, which is not as high as that of the prosecution whereby the accused is only required to show the existence of a CC No.1283/1 page no.4/11 probable defence so as to rebut the above presumptions. If the accused succeeds in raising a probable defence by referring to his own evidence (if any) and from the evidence of the complainant, then the onus would shift on to the complainant, who then would have to show beyond reasonable doubt the existence of consideration/existence of a legally recoverable debt or liability in respect of the cheques in question. Appreciation of Evidence 16. The present case is proceeded on case law i.e. Rajesh Aggarwal vs. State & Anr. - MANU/DE/1838/2010, vide which it is held by hon'ble High Court of Delhi that "17. The summary trial procedure to be followed for offences under Section 138 N.I. Act would thus be as under: Step I: On the day complaint is presented, if the complaint is accompanied by affidavit of complainant, the concerned MM shall scrutinize the complaint & documents and if commission of offence is made out, take cognizance & direct issuance of summons of accused, against whom case is made out. Step II: If the accused appears, the MM shall ask him to furnish bail bond to ensure his appearance during trial and ask him to take notice under section 251 Cr.P.C. and enter his plea of defence and fix the case for defence evidence, unless an application is made by an accused under section 145(2) of N.I. Act for recalling a witness for cross-examination on plea of defence. Step III: If there is an application under Section 145(2) of N.I. Act for recalling a witness of complainant, the court shall decide the same, otherwise, it shall proceed to take defence evidence on record and allow cross-examination of defence witnesses by complainant. Step IV: To hear arguments of both sides. Step V: To pass order/judgment." CC No.1283/1 page no.5/11 17. Hon'ble Delhi High Court, in the above mentioned case, emphasized that once the complainant has brought forward his case by giving his affidavit about the issuance of the cheque, dishonour of cheque, issuance of demand notice etc. he can be cross-examined only if the accused makes an application to the court as to on what point he wants to cross-examine the witnesses and then only the court shall recall the witness by recording reasons there to. 18. In a summary trial, the complainant or his witness cannot be recalled in the court for cross-examination only for the sake of pleasure. In the present complaint case after recording the plea of defence at the time of framing notice, opportunity was given to the accused for filing of the proper application. However, the accused made no application under section 145(2) of the Act for recalling the complainant for cross- examination on his plea of defence. Therefore, there was no reason to recall the complainant or witnesses during summary trial and the evidence already given by the complainant has to be considered sufficient and the matter proceeded accordingly. 19. In order to prove his innocence accused examined Bank official of Delhi State Cooperative Bank, Samay Pur Badli Branch as DW1. DW1 who has brought the summoned record i.e statement of account of Mahesh Sharma i.e Ex.DW1/1. DW1 stated that a cheque bearing no.650948 dated 20.06.2009 for a sum of Rs. 15,750/- was cleared/encashed from SB A/c no.1685 in the account of M/s Aman Services. Report is Ex.DW1/2. DW1 was duly cross examined by the complainant however, nothing material has been come out from his cross examination. 20. Accused examined his brother in law i.e. Shri Mahesh Sharma as DW2. In his examination in chief DW2 stated that he had issued the cheque i.e Ex.DW1/2 i.e. cheque bearing no.650948 dated 20.06.2009 for a sum of Rs.15,750/- drawn on The Delhi State Cooperative Bank, Samaypur Badli Branch, Delhi in favour of complainant on the asking of accused. DW2 further stated that the accused has also told him that he had already made the part payment of Rs. 10,000/- out of total due amount of Rs.25,750/- to the employee of complainant namely Ramesh on 27.05.2009. In his cross examination DW2 admitted that he was told by the accused regarding the said due amount in the first week of June 2009. DW2 further explained that he made the said payment in favour of complainant because the accused was CC No.1283/1 page no.6/11 not having sufficient funds to pay the above said liability. DW2 admitted that no other part amount was paid by the accused in his presence. However, all the suggestions put to him by the counsel for complainant were denied by the DW2. 21. Accused examined himself as DW3 and stated in his examination in chief that he is proprietor of M/s Rahul Trading Company. Accused stated that he had purchased some electronic goods from M/s Aman Services vide book no. 54, bill no. 2903 dated 28.03.2009 i.e. Ex.DW3/1 for an amount of Rs. 57,500/-. Accused further stated that against the said purchase, most of the amount was paid to the complainant in cash and had issued the cheque in question in favour of complainant for the repayment of remaining amount. Accused further stated that he had made payment of said due amount of Rs. 25,750/- by way of part payment of Rs. 10,000/- in cash to the employee of complainant namely Rajesh on 27.05.2009 as per endorsement on the back of above said original bill and same is Ex.DW3/2. Accused further stated that he paid the remaining amount of Rs. 15,750/- to the complainant to his brother in law Mahesh Sharma i.e DW2 vide cheque bearing no.650948 drawn on Delhi Cooperative State Bank for the sum of Rs. 15,750/- and same was encashed by the complainant. In his cross examination accused stated that he used to purchase electronic goods from the complainant as the complainant is a distributor of electronic goods in his area. Accused further explained that he used to made payment for the purchase of goods from the complainant by cheque as well as in cash through his representative who used to visit his retail outlet which is not disputed by the complainant. Accused further explained that he had been given credit limit of about one month to pay the amount accrued upon invoiced and he used to pay the same within the said period by installments. Accused admitted the receiving of legal notice. However, all the suggestions put to him by the counsel for complainant were denied by the DW3. 22. It is argued by the Ld. counsel for complainant that from evidence on record, the complainant has proved that cheque in question was signed by the accused which was dishonoured vide bank memo and despite the legal notice accused did not make the payment. It is argued that the accused failed to cross examine the complainant, hence, nothing material has come out and the complainant has been able to prove his case. It is further argued that accused has failed to CC No.1283/1 page no.7/11 discharge the burden upon him to rebutt the presumption in favour of the complainant under the Act. 23. Now the question is whether the complainant proved his case, that whether the amount was legally enforceable debt. Offence under Section 138 of the Act is a technical offence and the complainant is only supposed to prove that the cheque issued by the accused was dishonoured, his statement that cheque was issued against liability or debt is sufficient proof of the debt or liability and the onus shifts to the accused to show the circumstances under which the cheque was issued and this could be proved by the accused only by way of cogent evidence. 24. Ld. Counsel for accused argued that the cheque in question was given to the complainant for the payment of remaining amount of Rs. 25,750/- for the purchase of electronic goods from him vide invoice Ex.DW3/1. It is further argued that on 27.05.2009 the accused paid part amount of Rs. 10,000/- to his employee namely Rajesh and the remaining amount of Rs. 15,750/- was paid to the accused through cheque Ex.DW1/2 of the DW2. It is further argued that accused has already made the due payment to the complainant and no other amount is legally recoverable from him. It is further argued that there is no legally enforceable liability towards the complainant as alleged in the present case and the cheque in question was misused by the complainant malafidely with intention to harass the accused. 25. Accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The accused may adduce direct evidence/evidence on preponderance of probabilities to prove that cheque in question was not supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be discharged by him. However, there is no need that the accused should disprove the non existence of consideration and debt by leading direct evidence because the existence of negative evidence is neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time it is clear that bare denial of the passing of the consideration and existence of debt, apparently would not serve the purpose of the accused. Something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the complainant. CC No.1283/1 page no.8/11 26. From the material on record, it is established that the complainant and accused are known to each other and are having business relations with each other. The signatures on the cheque in question is not disputed by the accused. It is further established on record that the cheque in question issued by the accused got dishonored vide bank memo. It is also established on record that the cheque in question pertains to the account of the accused. The receiving of the legal notice sent by the complainant is admitted by the accused. However, no reply was ever given by the accused to the said legal notice. 27. The plea of defence raised by the accused is that he had issued cheque in question to the complainant for the payment of remaining amount for the purchase of electronic goods vide invoice/bill i.e. Ex.DW3/1. Perusal of the document Ex.DW3/1 reveals that electronic goods worth Rs. 57,500/- was purchased by M/s Rahul Trading Company from M/s Aman Services. Accused is the proprietor of the M/s Rahul Trading Company. Complainant is the proprietor of M/s Aman Services. Further defence of the accused is that he had paid the part amount towards the payment of invoice/bill Ex.DW3/1 and amount of Rs. 25,750/- was due upon him. No doubt the accused has not furnished on record any proof regarding the alleged part payments of the due amount of Rs. 57,500/- upon which the liability remains to the extent of Rs. 25,750/-. Further defence of the accused is that he had repaid the outstanding amount of Rs. 25,750/- to the complainant. For the said outstanding amount, accused has proved that he had paid the part payment of Rs.10,000/- to the employee of the complainant namely Rajesh under his signatures on the back side of the Ex.DW3/1. The said receiving of the said part amount of Rs. 10,000/- is Ex. DW3/2. 28. Through the testimonies of the DW1 and DW2, the accused intends to establish on record that he had repaid the remaining amount of Rs.15,750/- to the complainant by way of cheque of his brother in law i.e. the cheque no. 650948 dated 20.06.2009 drawn on Delhi State Co-operative Bank Ltd., Samaypur Badli, Delhi from SB A/c No. 1685 of Sh. Mahesh Sharma. 29. The testimony of the bank official i.e. DW1 establishes on record that payment of Rs. 15,750/- through the above said cheque has been cleared / encashed CC No.1283/1 page no.9/11 in the account of complainant. The testimony of DW2 i.e. Sh. Mahesh Sharma reveals that he had issued the cheque bearing no. 650948 dated 20.06.2009 drawn on Delhi State Co-operative Bank Ltd., Samaypur Badli, Delhi in favour of the complainant on the asking of accused in lieu of the discharge of the remaining liability of the accused. The complainant has failed to explain the details for which the above said cheque bearing no. 650948 dated 20.06.2009 drawn on Delhi State Co- operative Bank Ltd., Samaypur Badli, Delhi has been encashed in his account. Further the accused has not brought on record any iota of evidence regarding his business dealing or business transaction with accused no.2 at any point of time. Meaning thereby, the clearance / encashment of the payment vide cheque bearing no. 650948 dated 20.06.2009 drawn on Delhi State Co-operative Bank Ltd., Samaypur Badli, Delhi is not regarding any independent transaction but is for the payment of the remaining liability of the accused as per his plea of defence. Therefore, the plea of defence raised by the accused is highly believable. 30. Therefore, I am of the opinion that the alleged issuance of the cheques in question by the accused to the complainant for the alleged transaction is highly improbable and is not acceptable hence, the possibility of misusing of the cheques in question of the accused cannot be ignored. Considering the above said facts of the case, the accused a raises grave doubt on the alleged liability by proving the repayment of the alleged amount of the cheque prior to the dishonor of cheque in question. 31. It is well settled law that in a criminal case, prosecution has to stand upon its own legs and it cannot take the advantage of the fact that accused has not led cogent defence evidence or accused is having a weak defence. The defence raised by the accused along with the evidence placed on record are cogent proof in support of the defence version makes it highly probable that the cheque in question was not issued towards the discharge of liability as alleged by the complainant and at the same time it weakens the foundation fabrics of the present complaint case. The suspicious circumstances rising in the present case will certainly give advantage to the accused. Moreover, the complainant has concealed the material facts from the court and had not come to the court with clean hands and his conduct is not of a prudent man. Hence, in the present case, the accused raises a cogent suspicious CC No.1283/1 page no.10/11 circumstances in the version of the complainant which belies the foundation of the present complaint case and same is sufficient to rebutt the presumption that the cheques in question were not for discharging the legal liability. Conclusion 32. I have gone through the entire material on record carefully and heard the arguments advance by the counsel for parties at length. After analyzing the evidence led by the parties, I am of the opinion that accused has been successful in rebutting the presumptions under NI Act by raising cogent suspicion in the version of complainant and on the scale of preponderance of probabilities that the cheques in question may not be given to the complainant as alleged by him. 33. The rebuttal does not have to be conclusively established but such evidence must be adduced before the court in support of the defence that Court must either believe the defence to exist or consider its existence to be reasonably probable. In the present case accused has not only been able to raise a probable defence and adduced sufficient evidence to prove his defence but also been able to succeed in shaking the very foundation of the fabrics of the case of the complainant. 34. Once the accused has discharged his initial burden of proving its defence the onus rebutted back on the complainant. However in the present case, complainant has miserably failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. 35. Therefore, from the above discussions, this court is of considered view that in the circumstances appearing from the record of the case, the accused is entitled to the benefit of doubt. Accordingly, the accused is entitled to be acquitted and hereby stands acquitted of the offence under Section 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act. Announced in open court on SATVIR SINGH LAMBA 18th Day of February, 2014 MM-01(NI.ACT)WEST/DELHI CC No.1283/1 page no.11/11
