DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG116

TITLE: Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal vs . Pawan Soni Page 1 Of 11 on 13 October, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/186263843/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, case, vimal, pawan, soni, page, october, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

THE COURT OF SHRI RAVINDER SINGH­II METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE DWARKA COURTS, NEW DELHI Case No. : 2836/12 Unique Case ID No. : 02405R0164672011 Sh. Vimal Proprietor of Shivam Building Material Suppliers, Vilalge Bamnoli, P.O. Dhoolsiras, Sector­28, Plot No. 143, Near Dwarka, New Delhi­110077 ..................................Complainant Versus Sh. Pawan Soni Proprietor of Balaji Water Supply, RZ­7A/29, Gali No. 3, Puran Nagar, Palam Colony, New Delhi­110045 ...................................Accused Date of Institution: 29.04.2011 Plea of the accused: Pleaded Not Guilty Date of Reserving Judgment: 09/10/2014 Sentence or final Order: Acquitted/convicted Date of Judgment: 13/10/2014 JUDGMENT BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE CASE 1. By way of the present judgment, I shall decide the complaint case U/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (hereinafter Said as NI Act) filed by the complainant Sh. Vimal against the accused Pawan Soni ( Proprietor of Balaji Water Supply) S/o Late Sh. Satpal Soni. PROLOGUE (COMPLAINANT'S VERSION) 2. The factual matrix necessary for disposal of the present case as per the allegations in the complaint are that the accused person was <span class="hidden_text" id="span_1">Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal Vs. Pawan Soni Page 1 of 11</span> known to the complainant through a common friend of the complainant and the accused namely, Sh. Sandeep Jain. It is alleged that the accused introduced himself to the complainant as the proprietor of Balalji Water Supply. It is alleged that in the month of October, 2010 the accused approached the complainant and asked for a loan of Rs. 2 lakhs stating that he is in some urgent need of money for his business. It is alleged that keeping in view the friendly relations the complainant granted a friendly loan of Rs. 2 lakhs to the accused. It is further alleged that the accused also assured the complainant to return the said amount by January, 2011. It is further alleged that when the accused failed to repay the said loan amount, the complainant requested the accused to return the loan amount. It is further alleged that in order to discharge his loan liability the accused has issued the cheque in question bearing no. 804435 dated 04.02.2011 drawn at ICICI Bank, Dwarka branch, New Delhi for a sum of Rs. 2,00,000/­. It is further alleged that the said cheque on presentation was dishonored on the account of "Insufficient Funds". It is further alleged that thereafter the complainant has given a legal demand notice dated 30.03.2011 to the accused which was sent to the accused through registered post on 30.03.2011 itself thereby calling upon the accused to make the payment of the cheque amount. It is alleged that the accused has received the legal demand notice and despite the receipt of the failed to pay any sum in response to the same as a result of which the complainant has filed the present complaint for prosecution of the accused Pawan Soni, S/o Late Sh. Satpal Soni U/s 138 of the NI Act. COMPLAINANT'S EVIDENCE 3. The complainant Vimal got himself examined as CW­1 and adopted and tendered his pre summoning evidence affidavit Ex. CW­1/A. CW­1 also relied upon documents Ex. CW1/1 to Ex. CW1/4 (Colly.). Ex. CW1/1 is the original copy of the letter of ICICI Bank dated <span class="hidden_text" id="span_2">Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal Vs. Pawan Soni Page 2 of 11</span> 03.02.2011 issued to the accused. Ex. CW1/2 is the original cheque in question, Ex. CW1/3 is the cheque returning memo, Ex. CW1/4 (Colly.) is the legal demand notice along with the postal receipt. The above said documents in the judicial record were also given exhibit marks as PW­1 to PW­4 (Colly.) respectively in the above said order. CW­1 was duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused. Thereafter, the complainant's evidence was closed at request of the complainant. STATEMENT OF ACCUSED U/S 313 OF THE CODE 4. Thereafter the statement of accused was recorded U/s 313 of the Code in which all the incriminating evidence along with exhibited documents were put to the accused Pawan Soni. The accused admitted that he has approached the complainant through Sandeep Jain for taking loan of Rs. 2 lakh which was granted to him by the complainant. The accused further admitted that he is also the proprietor of Balaji Water Supply. The accused further stated that he has not issued the cheque in question in discharge of his liability as alleged by the complainant. The accused further stated that the blank signed cheque in question was given by him to the complainant as a security at the time of taking of loan. It is further stated by that accused that he was not aware of the dishonour of the cheque as he was hospitalized at the time when the complainant presented the the cheque in question to its banker. It is further stated by the accused that the cheque in question was presented by the complainant without any intimation to him. The accused stated that he has not received any legal demand notice from the complainant demanding the cheque amount in question. The accused further admitted that he owe loan amount of Rs. 2 lakhs to the complainant and further submitted that the complainant has misused his security cheque for filing the present complaint case. Further, the accused also stated that he wants to make the payment of the loan amount to the complainant after settling his dispute with his brother. Accused further stated that <span class="hidden_text" id="span_3">Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal Vs. Pawan Soni Page 3 of 11</span> he has not issued the cheque in question in discharge of his liability. Thereafter the case was fixed for defence evidence DEFENCE EVIDENCE. 5. Accused has not examined any witness in his defence. Thereafter defence evidence was closed at request of the accused and the case was listed for final arguments. FINAL ARGUMENTS 6. Final arguments were addressed on behalf of both the parties. I have heard Ld. Counsels for both the parties and perused the entire record of the case file. Before proceeding further it is imperative for me to go through the relevant provisions of law. Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act provides that: "Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc, of fun ds in the account:Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in while or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation:For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability. APPRECIATION OF EVIDENCE IN THE LIGHT OF THE INGREDIENTS OF SECTION 138 OF THE NI ACT AND THE DEFENCE RAISED BY THE ACCUSED <span class="hidden_text" id="span_4">Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal Vs. Pawan Soni Page 4 of 11</span> 7. It is not disputed by the accused that he is the proprietor of Balaji Water Supply. Further it is also not disputed by the accused the Cheque in Question Ex. CW1/1 is drawn on the account maintained by him in the name of Balaji Water Supply. Further, the accused has also admitted his signatures on the cheque in question both at the time of framing of notice U/s 251 of the Code and also in his statement U/s 313 of the Code. Further the presentation, dishonor of the cheque in question and the cheque returning memo has also not been challenged by the accused. Therefore, In light of the evidence on record coupled with the admission by the accused it stands duly proved that the accused is a proprietor of Balaji Water Supply and the cheque in question Ex CW1/1 is drawn on the account maintained by him in the name of Balaji Water Supply. Further it also stands proved that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/1 was got dishonored vide cheque returning memo Ex. CW1/2 with the reason "Funds Insufficient". 8. From the perusal of the entire evidence it has come to the fore that two fold defence has been taken by the accused. Firstly, that he has not received any legal demand notice from the complainant and Secondly that the blank signed cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 has been issued by him as security to the complainant at the time of taking of the loan and not in discharge of his loan liability as alleged by the complainant. 9. Coming to the first line of defence taken by the accused that he has not received any legal demand notice from the complainant, it is pertinent to note that complainant CW­1 has specifically stated in his evidence affidavit Ex. CW1/A that he got issued the legal notice of demand dated 30.03.2011 to the accused which is Ex. CW1/4 (Colly). CW­1 has also placed on record the registered post receipt dated 30.03.2011 Ex. CW1/4 (Colly) vide which <span class="hidden_text" id="span_5">Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal Vs. Pawan Soni Page 5 of 11</span> the said legal demand notice was sent. 10. The accused both at the time of framing of the notice U/s 251 of the Code also in his statement under section 313 of the code has denied the receipt of the legal demand notice Ex. CW1/3. I have perused the legal notice of demand. It bears the same address of the accused as mentioned by the complainant in the complaint. The said address has never been challenged by the accused in fact the same address has been furnished by the accused on his bail bond. Therefore it is evident that the legal demand notice Ex. CW1/3 has been sent at the correct address of the accused. Further the registered post receipt issued by the postal authorities in ordinary course is also placed on record by CW­1. It is trite to say that when there is service of notice by post on the correct address which evidently has taken place in the present case there is always a presumption that the legal demand notice has been duly served upon the accused unless some concrete evidence in rebuttal is adduced by the accused to establish that the Legal Demand Notice has not been served upon him. It was for the accused to rebut the presumption about the service of notice and show that he had no knowledge that the notice was brought to his address or that the address mentioned on the notice was incorrect or that the notice was never tendered or that the postal receipt was incorrect. Except denials the accused has not any lead any evidence to corroborate his stand. Therefore its stands proved that the legal demand notice has been served upon the accused. As such non receipt of legal demand notice as a defence on part of the accused has no force. 11. Now coming to the second line of defence which has been taken by the accused that the blank signed cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 has been issued by him as security to the complainant at the time of taking of the loan and not in discharge of his loan liability as alleged by the complainant. Taking up the first limb of the defence. It is <span class="hidden_text" id="span_6">Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal Vs. Pawan Soni Page 6 of 11</span> not disputed by the accused that the Cheque in Question Ex. CW1/2 is drawn on the account maintained by him in the name of Balaji water Supply. Further signature on the cheque in question has also not been disputed by the accused. However, it is submitted by the accused that except signatures no other particulars in the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 has been filled by him. During the course of arguments Ld. Counsel for the accused also submitted that the entire particulars in the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 has not been filled by the accused. It is trite to say that by putting the name and date there is no material alteration on the cheque U/s 87 of the NI Act. There is no rule of banking business that the name of the payee as well as the amount should be written by the drawer himself as no law provides that in case of a cheque the entire body has to be written by the drawer only. Therefore, once the signature on the cheque in question is admitted as has happened in the instant case, the plea that particulars in the cheque in question has not been filled by the drawer is of no consequence unless some cogent evidence has been lead by the accused that he has not expressly or impliedly authorized the payee to fill the particulars therein which is totally absenting in the case in hand. Therefore the defence on the part of the accused that except signature no other particulars have been filled by him also holds no ground. 12. Before I advert to the second part of the of the defence taken by the accused it is imperative for me to go through the provisions of Sections 118(a) and 139 of the Act which read as under: "118. Presumptions as to negotiable instruments.-- Until the contrary is proved, the following presumptions shall be made­ (a) of consideration.--that every negotiable instru­ ment was made or drawn for consideration, and that every such instrument when it has been accepted, indorsed, nego­ tiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for consideration;" "139. Presumption in favour of holder.--It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque, of the nature referred to in <span class="hidden_text" id="span_7">Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal Vs. Pawan Soni Page 7 of 11</span> Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. 13. The Division bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Krishna Janardhan Bhat v. Dattatraya G. Hegde, (2008) 4 SCC 54, has held that the accused can discharge the burden of presumption U/s 118 and U/s 139 of the NI Act by raising a probable defence on the strength of preponderance of probabilities. 14. In Rangappa Versus Sri Mohan AIR 2010 SC 1898 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is a settled position that when an accused has to rebut the presumption under Section 139, the stan­ dard of proof for doing so is that of "preponderance of probabilities". Therefore, if the accused is able to raise a probable defence which cre­ ates doubts about the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liabili­ ty, the prosecution can fail. 15. From the reading of the above said provisions and the judgments the position of law which emerges is that once execution of the promissory note is admitted as has happened in the case in hand, the presumption under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act would arise that it is supported by a consideration. Such a presump­ tion is rebuttable in nature. The accused can prove the non­existence of a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the accused dis­ charges the initial onus of proof by showing that the existence of con­ sideration was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the complainant who will be obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and upon its failure to prove would disentitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. The bur­ den upon the accused of proving the non­existence of the considera­ tion can be either direct or by bringing on record the preponderance of probabilities by reference to the circumstances upon which he re­ lies. In case, where the accused fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non­existence of the consideration, the com­ <span class="hidden_text" id="span_8">Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal Vs. Pawan Soni Page 8 of 11</span> plainant would invariably be held entitled to the benefit of presump­ tion arising under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act in his favour. 16. Now coming to the case in hand, in the instant case it is admitted by the accused both at the time of framing of notice and also in his statement under section 313 of the code that he has taken loan a loan of Rs. 2,00,000/­ from the complainant. The accused has further admitted that he still owe the loan amount to the complainant, but with respect to the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 it is submitted by the accused that he has signed the same and has given the same to the complainant as a security. Surprisingly during cross examination of CW­1 (complainant) suggestions were put to the witness that the accused has not taken loan him and the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 was also given by the accused to Sh. Sandeep Jain and not to the complainant which is clearly in contradiction to the stand of the accused taken by him at the time of framing of notice under section 251 of the code and also during his statement under section 313 of the code that he has taken loan from the complainant and the cheque in question was given by him to the complainant as a security and in turn seriously denting the stand of the accused. Further the accused has not even examined himself to corroborate his stand neither he has examined the said Sandeep Jain through whom he has approached the complainant for taking loan from the complainant. It was for the accused to prove the circumstances under which the cheque in question has come in the possession of the complainant by leading cogent evidence so as to discharge and rebut the presumption raised against him by the Statute U/s 139 and 118 (a) of the NI Act. Apart from the aforesaid flawed stand, explanations and suggestions no evidence has been lead by the accused to corroborate his stand. It is trite to say that merely putting suggestions to the complainant's witness and giving explanations in the statement U/s 313 of the Code without examining any defence witness would not be sufficient to discharge the burden of presumption casted upon the accused by <span class="hidden_text" id="span_9">Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal Vs. Pawan Soni Page 9 of 11</span> virtue of provisions of Section 118 (a) and 139 of the NI Act. 17. In V. S. Yadav Vs. Reena 2010 VIII AD (Delhi) 35 it has been held by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court that the statement U/s 313 of the Code is not the evidence of the accused and it cannot be read as a part of evidence as it has to be looked into only as an explanation of incriminating circumstances against the accused. There is no presumption of law that the explanation given by the accused is truthful. Mere pleading non guilty at the stage of notice U/s 251 of the Code or explanation given in statement U/s 313 of the Code or suggestions put to the complainant in cross examination that the cheque in question was a security cheque does not amount to rebuttal of the presumption U/s 139 of the NI Act especially when the accused did not choose to examine himself in defence. 18. Therefore, it clear that mere denial on the part of the accused would not absolve him from any liability. The accused has not brought any material on record and also no cogent explanations or any probable defence which would rebut the shadow of presumption existing in favour of the Complainant. This court do not find any force in the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the accused that the accused has succeeded in rebutting the presumption under Section 139 of the Act. 19. Considering the evidence on record, It stands duly proved that the accused has failed to rebut the presumptions U/s 118 (a) and section 139 of the NI Act. Therefore, I hereby hold that the Com­ plainant has proved and substantiated the allegations that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/2 was issued by the accused in discharge of his loan liability and for consideration. Furthermore, accused has also failed to prove that he has made payment to the complainant within 15 days from the receipt of the legal demand notice. 20. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I hereby hold that the complainant has proved and substantiated its allegation against the accused and further all the ingredients of Section 138 of the NI Act also stands proved. Accordingly, accused Pawan Soni S/o Late Sh. Satpal Soni is hereby convicted for the offence u/s 138 of the NI Act. This judgment contains 11 pages. Every Page of this judgment has been signed by me Copy of this judgment be given to the convict free of cost. Announced in the open Court (RAVINDER SINGH ­II) Dated 13.10.2014 MM (NI Act ­07) Dwarka/New Delhi <span class="hidden_text" id="span_11">Case No. : 4744/14 Vimal Vs. Pawan Soni Page 11 of 11</span>
