DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG115

TITLE: In The Case Titled Goa Plast Pvt. ... vs . Chico Ursula D'Souza on 1 February, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/55961800/



DOMAIN: Criminal Law

SUBDOMAIN: Criminal Justice

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, case, titled, plast, chico, ursula, souza, february, financial, criminal law

CONTENT:

­1­ IN THE COURT OF SH. PANKAJ SHARMA, METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­01, DWARKA COURTS, DELHI Brief reasons for the judgment in the case with following particulars: Naresh Kumar VS Randhir Singh CC NO. 1074/12 PS: Palam Village U/S: 138 N.I. Act Date of Institution: 19.02.2004 Name of the Complainant Naresh Kumar s/o Sh. Hosiyar Singh r/o WZ 50 C, Palam Village, New Delhi­45. Name and address of accused Randhir Singh s/o Shriram, r/o WZ 22­23, Palam village, New Delhi­45. Offence complained of U/s 138 N.I. Act Plea of accused pleaded not guilty Final Order Convicted Date of such order 01.02.2014 Date of Institution of case: 19.02.2004 Date of hearing final arguments:16.01.2014 Date of decision of the case: 01.02.2014 BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE CASE 1. By way of the present Judgment, I shall decide the complaint case u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (as amended upto date) ­2­ filed by the complainant. 2. The facts in brief necessary for the disposal of the present case are that the accused approached the complainant and showed his dire needs for financial help and requested for grant of a friendly loan to the tune of Rs. 2,50,000/­ and considering the request of the accused the complainant granted a friendly loan of Rs. 2,50,000/­ to the accused and which was duly received by the accused. For discharge of his liability to pay back the said loan amount to the complainant, the accused issued post dated cheques in favour of the complainant bearing no. 000833 and cheque no. 000834 dated 02.01.2004 for a sum of Rs. 1,25,000/­ each both cheques drawn on UTI Bank Ltd. Palam (Delhi) WZ 24 A, Palam Village, Delhi. While issuing the cheques the accused assured the complainant that the same were good for payment and will be honoured as and when presented on its due dates for encashment. The said cheques were presented by the complainant for encashment through his banker i.e UTI Bank Ltd. ,Palam (Delhi), WZ 24 A, Palam village, New Delhi on 06.01.2004 but the same was returned dishonoured by the banker of the accused i.e the same bank UTI Bank Ltd., Palam (Delhi), WZ 24 A, Palam village, New Delhi with the bank cheque returning memo dated ­3­ 07.01.2004 with the remark "Insufficient Funds" and information to the complainant was communicated on 07.01.2004 by his banker. Thereafter the complainant through his counsel served a legal notice of demand dt. 21.01.2004 through registered post AD/UPC post at the address of the accused demanding payment of the dishonoured cheque within 15 days of the receipt of the notice. Despite the service of the legal notice, the accused has not made the payment of the cheques in question to the complainant till date. It is alleged that the accused has failed to pay any sum in response to the legal notice of demand. As a result of which the complainant has filed the instant complaint for prosecution of the accused u/s 138 NI Act. 3. After the complaint was filed the complainant led pre­ summoning evidence who tendered his affidavit in evidence and after hearing the Counsel for the complainant and considering the entire material and documents on record, summons were issued against the accused vide order dated 13.08.2004 for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. On appearance of the accused, a notice u/s 251 Cr.P.C. Dated 30.01.2006 was given to the accused to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. ­4­ 4. In order to prove its case the complainant got himself examined as CW­1 and reiterated the contents of the complaint on oath before the court. He got exhibited the certified copies of cheques bearing no. 000833 and cheque no. 000834 dated 02.01.2004 for a sum of Rs. 1,25,000/­ each both cheques drawn on UTI Bank Ltd. Palam (Delhi) WZ 24 A, Palam Village, Delhi as Ex. CW1/A & Ex. CW1/B and the certified copy of cheque returning memo dt. 07.01.2004 as Ex. CW1/C ,the legal notice of demand dated 20.01.2004 as Ex. CW­1/D and the postal receipt, registered post and UPC vide which the aforesaid notice was sent as Ex. CW­1/E, Ex.CW1/F & Ex.CW1/G respectively. In his cross examination the complainant stated the cheques in question were filled by the accused in words and figure but the name of the payee was also written by the accused. He further stated that cheques in question were filled in front of him and the name of the payee the amount in words and figure and the dates were filled by the accused. CW1 denied the suggestion that cheques in question were stolen by him and except the signature of the accused the other details have been filled by himself or by his agent. He stated that he does not know whether the accused is educated or illiterate. He stated that he cannot say as to whether any notice was sent by him to the accused or not. He stated ­5­ that he knows the accused Randhir since he is also native of same village and he knows him since childhood as he is also his friend. CW1 stated that he advanced the loan amount in cash in 2003 and he does not remember the day and time when he handed over the cash to the accused. He stated that he advanced the loan only in one installment and his father handed over him a cheque amount of Rs. 15,00,000/­ in year 2000 to him and it was a bearer cheque in his name. He further stated that he encashed the same amount and withdrew the said amount and the said amount was taken by him and the same was kept at his house. He stated that he withdrew this amount on 20.05.2000 and the said loan amount was advanced by him to the accused without interest and he never asked for interest on the loan amount from the accused. CW1 stated that the affidavit Ex. CW1/A was read over to him by his advocate. Thereafter, the Complainant's Evidence was closed on 21.08.2013. 5. After that the statement of accused was recorded u/s 313 Cr.P.C. in which all the incriminating evidence along with exhibited documents were put to the accused wherein he stated that he had issued the cheques in question but the same were blank and was issued for security purpose. He admitted that cheques in question Ex. CW1/A and ­6­ Ex. CW1/B got dishonoured vide return memo Ex. CW1/C dated 07.01.2004 with remarks "insufficient funds". In his statement u/s 313 Cr.P.C he stated that he did not receive the legal notice and stated that the address is correct and he has been living at the given address since birth. No DE was led by the accused. Thereafter the matter was fixed for final arguments. 6. It is argued on behalf of the complainant that complainant and accused are of same village and friend. It is further submitted by Ld. Counsel for the complainant that after issuing the cheques in question when the accused appeared in trial he got matter settled in mediation also and thereafter delayed in making payment and finally did not make the payment as per mediation settlement and asked for trial of the offence. It is further submitted by Ld. Counsel for the complainant that notice has been duly served upon the accused and complaint was filed within limitation and the liability of the accused existed for issue the cheques which were later dishonoured. It is further submitted by Ld. Counsel for the complainant that accused has made two different story in this case in the cross examination of CW1 he says that the cheque was stolen and now he is saying that the cheque is forcibly taken by the ­7­ complainant from the accused. It is further argued by Ld. Counsel for the complainant that in civil case arising of these cheques decree has been passed. 7. On the other hand it is argued by Ld. Counsel for the accused that the complainant did not place any proof of the withdrawal from the bank to substantiate the liability as complainant is a man of no means and it is difficult to imagine that he could lend a loan to an extent of a cheuque amount. Ld. Counsel for the accused has pointed out towards the income tax act where any payment more than Rs. 20,000/­ is to be mandatorily paid by way of cheque and not by cash. It is further submitted by Ld. Counsel for the accused that no legally recoverable debt exists payable by the accused and as such present complaint is a false and accused has been falsely implicated. It is further submitted by Ld. Counsel for the accused that the cheque in question was forcibly obtained from the accused by the complainant for the amount of committee which is not a legally recoverable debt. 8. In order to bring home the conviction of the accused, the complainant has to show not only an unbroken chain of events leading to ­8­ commission of actual offence on record but also the ingredients of the offence complained of. 9. Before proceeding further let us go through the relevant provisions of law. The main ingredient of Section 138 of the Negotiable Act are as follows:­ (i) The accused issued a cheque on an account maintained by him with a bank. (ii) The said cheque has been issued in discharge of any legal debt or other liability. (iii) The cheque has been presented to the bank within the period of six months from the date of the cheque or within the period of its validity. (iv) When the aforesaid cheque was presented for encasement, the same were returned unpaid/dishonoured. (v) The payee of the cheque issued a legal notice of demand within 30 days from the receipt of information by him from the Bank regarding the return of the cheque. (vi) The drawer of the cheque failed to make the payment within 15 days of the receipt of the aforesaid legal notice of demand. If the aforesaid ingredients are satisfied then the drawer of the cheque shall be deemed to committed an offence punishable u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act. Now let us deal with the each ingredient of the section 138 of ­9­ Negotiable Instruments Act to see whether the case against the accused has been proved or not. 10. WHETHER THE ACCUSED HAS ISSUED A CHEQUE ON ACCOUNT MAINTAINED BY HIM WITH THE BANK. The accused has himself admitted to have issued the cheques in question in his statement u/s 313 Cr.P.C. From the facts on record and after due admission of the accused that he issued the cheques to the complainant duly signed by him during the trial, the present fact stands proved. Even this may be the case the person who is voluntarily giving the blank cheque duly signed by him takes the risk of it being used. Therefore, it stands duly proved that the cheque has been issued by the accused. 11. THE SAID CHEQUES HAVE BEEN ISSUED IN DISCHARGE OF ANY LEGAL DEBT OR OTHER LIABILITY. In his statement u/s 313 Cr.P.C accused himself admitted that he had issued the cheque to the complainant but the same was issued for security purpose. Also there is a presumption in favour of the complainant u/s 118 Indian Evidence Act that until the contrary is proved, it will be presumed that every negotiable instrument was drawn for consideration and every such instrument when it has been accepted, endorsed, negotiated or transferred was accepted, endorsed, negotiated or transferred for negotiation. Further Section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 provides that it shall be presumed until the contrary is proved that the ­10­ holder of the cheque received the cheque of the nature referred in the Section 138 for the discharge in whole or in part or in debt or liability. Further Section 139 NI Act is kind of reverse onus clause which puts burden on the accused to prove its case. Once the cheque relates to the account of the accused and he/she accepts and admits the signatures on the said cheque, then initial presumption as contemplated u/s 139 NI Act has to be raised by court in favour of the complainant. This presumption is mandatory presumption and not a general presumption but the accused is entitled to rebut the said presumption. What is required to be established by the accused in order to rebut the presumption is different from each case under given circumstances. But the fact remains that a mere plausible explanation is not expected from the accused and it must be more than a plausible explanation by way of rebuttal evidence. In other words, the defence raised by the accused must be probable and capable of being accepted. Merely submitting before the court without putting any evidence that cheques given were lost cheques for which intimation had been given to police would be of no use to the complainant. In the case titled Goa Plast Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Chico Ursula D'souza 2003 (2).RCR.(CR.)131.SC. Hon'ble Supreme Court held ­ "It is to be presumed that a cheque is issued in discharge of any debt or liability. The presumption can be rebutted by adducing evidence and the burden of proof is on person who wants to rebut the presumption." In another case titled as Hiten P. Dalal Vs. B. Banerjee.SCC.Criminal.960 Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed ­ ­11­ "There is a presumption of consideration for issuing the cheque and the burden of proving that the cheque was issued without consideration is upon the accused." Therefore, with the aforesaid discussion it stands duly proved that the accused has issued cheques bearing no. 000831 and cheque no. 000832 dated 02.01.2004 for a sum of Rs. 1,25,000/­ each both cheques drawn on UTI Bank Ltd. Palam (Delhi) WZ 24 A, Palam Village, Delhi as Ex. CW1/1 in favour of the complainant in discharge of his liability in the absence of any rebuttal evidence by him. 12. WHETHER THE CHEQUES WERE PRESENTED WITHIN THE PERIOD OF VALIDITY. Perusal of the record reveals that the cheques in question which is Ex. CW1/A and Ex.CW1/B are dated 02.01.2004 which got dishonoured vide cheque returning memo which is CW1/C dated 07.01.2004 which shows that the cheques have been presented within the period of its validity i.e. within six months from the date of issuance of the cheques. 13. DISHONOUR OF CHEQUE IN QUESTION In the instant case, the cheque returning memo which is Ex. CW­1/C is lying with the record of the case file. On perusal of the same it is revealed that the cheque returning memo is dated 07.01.2004 and the same was issued by the Drawee Bank and the reason of the dishonour of the cheques in question has been shown as 'INSUFFICIENT FUNDS'. Accordingly, it stands duly proved that when the cheques in question ­12­ which are Ex. CW1/A & Ex.CW1/B were presented for encashment, the same were dishonoured vide cheque returning memo which is Ex. CW­1/C with the remarks 'INSUFFICIENT FUNDS'. 14. SERVICE OF LEGAL NOTICE OF DEMAND UPON THE ACCUSED In the present case, the complainant has specifically stated in his pre summoning evidence by way of affidavit which is Ex. CX that he got issued the legal notice of demand dated 21.01.2004 Ex.CW1/D through registered post as well as UPC which are Ex. CW1/E to Ex.CW1/G through his counsel and the same has duly been served upon the accused. Legal notice bears the same address which was furnished by the complainant on the complaint and on which the summons were duly served to the accused. Further there is a presumption u/s 27 General Clauses Act in favour of the complainant that a properly address document sent by Registered Post is deemed to have been delivered if not returned back. In this case, cheques in question were dated 02.01.2004 dishonoured vide cheque returning memo Ex. CW1/C dated 07.01.2004 and the legal notice of demand Ex. CW1/D has been duly served upon the accused vide registered as well as UPC which is Ex. CW­1/E to Ex.CW1/G. It shows that the legal notice of demand has been served upon the accused within the statutory period of 30 days from the receipt of information by the complainant regarding the dishonour of the cheques issued by the accused. So, in view of the presumption raised u/s 27 General Clauses ­13­ Act the legal notice Ex.CW1/D stands served to the accused in view of the fact that in rebuttal no evidence was led by the accused. Further in view of judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case titled as "C.C. Alavi Haji Vs Palapetty Muhammed & Anr." Appeal (Crl.) 767 of 2007 wherein it is held that: "Any drawer who claims that he did not receive the notice sent by post, can, within 15 days of rceipt of summons from the court in respect of the complaint under Section 138 of the Act, make payment of the cheque amount and submit to the court that he had made payment withing 15 days of receipt of summons (by receiving a copy of complaint with the summons) and, therefore, the complaint is liable to be rejected. A person who does not pay within 15 days of receipt of the summons from the court along with the copy of the complaint under Section 138 of the Act, cannot obviously contend that there was no proper service of notice as required under Section 138, by ignoring statutory presumption to the contrary under Section 27 of the G.C. Act and Section 114 of the Evidence Act." 15. THE DRAWER OF THE CHEQUE HAS FAILED TO MAKE THE PAYMENT WITHIN 15 DAYS OF THE RECEIPT OF SAID CHEQUE In the case in hand, the complainant has deposed in evidence that despite receipt of the legal notice of demand, the accused did not make the payment of the cheque amount in question within 15 days of receipt of legal notice of demand. From the facts on record it is evident ­14­ that accused has failed to make payment within 15 days of receipt of said legal notice. The cause of action has well arisen in favour of the complainant u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments At when the accused has failed to pay the entire cheque amount within 15 days of the receipt of legal notice of demand. 16. I have heard the final arguments addressed by Ld. Counsels for the parties and have also carefully perused the entire record which include judgments filed by Ld. Counsel for the accused. 17. With respect to preliminary argument on behalf of the accused it is observed that the burden of proof in 138 NI Act case is on the accused to disprove the liability by adducing the evidence and once the initial burden is discharged by the accused, the same shift to the complainant to rebut the same. However, in this case the accused has merely stated that he did not owe the cheque amount to the complainant and has not brought any evidence to support his claim and thereby he has not been able to discharge the initial burden placed upon him by the statute. 18. In the present case, the accused admitted twice before the Court regarding the issuance of cheques for amount of Rs. 1,25,000/­each drawn on UTI Bank Ltd, in favour of the complainant, one at the time of framing of notice and another in his statement u/s 313Cr.P.C. However, at both times, he stated that he issued the cheque which was blank and as security cheque. The legal preposition in this regard is settled that if the person issues a cheque to someone duly signed by him, though blank, he ­15­ gives the authority to the drawee to fill the particulars in the cheque so given. Further, with respect to the contention raised on behalf of the accused that the cheque was a security cheque, the same is not supported by any evidence whatsoever during the trial and the same contention appears to be vague and accordingly unattainable in the eyes of law. 19. Further, in this case, accused got the matter referred before the mediation and got the matter settled with the complainant but later on did not pay the settlement amount and requested for the trial of the offence. No plausible explanation whatsoever has been given by the accused to revert from the mediation settlement arrived at between him and the complainant. Conclusion In view of the aforesaid discussion, this court is of the considered opinion that the complainant has proved its case against the accused beyond shadow of reasonable doubt. All the ingredients of Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act stands satisfied. Accordingly, accused stands convicted of the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act. Copy of this judgment be given to the convict free of cost. Announced in the Open Court (PANKAJ SHARMA) st today on this 1 day of February, 2014 MM : Dwarka : Delhi
