DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG142

TITLE: Ramakant Mittal vs . M/S Mak Mangalam & on 9 September, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/9058947/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, ramakant, mittal, mangalam, september, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

-:1:- IN THE COURT OF MS. MANU VEDWAN, LD. METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE : SPECIAL COURT - 05 (NI ACT) : DWARKA : DELHI Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another Complaint Case No. : 454/14 P.S. : Najafgarh U/s. : 138 N.I.Act J U D G M E N T 1. Name of the complainant : Sh. Rama Kant Mittal office at House No. 6, Mini Market J Block, Old Roshanpura, Najafgarh New Delhi­43 2 Name of the accused : 1 Mak Mangalam Through its Partner/Authorized Signatory A­22, Palam Extension, near Rampal Chowk, Sector ­7. Dwarka, New Delhi 2 Sh. Krishan Pal Tomar Partner/Authorized Signatory, Mak Mangalam A­22, Palam Extension, near Rampal Chowk, Sector ­7. Dwarka, New Delhi 3. Offence complained of : U/s.138 N.I.Act 4. Plea of accused : Pleaded not guilty 5. Final Order : Acquitted 6. Date of Reserving the : 09.09.2014 CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another Judgment 7. Date of Judgment : 09.09.2014 Date of Institution of case :16.08.2013 Date of Decision of the case :09.09.2014 BRIEF SKETCH OF THE CASE 1. Vide this judgment, I shall dispose of the complaint u/s.138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 against the accused. 2. It is the case of the complainant that complainant is engaged in the business of the cable advertisement in the name and style of M/s SG Media Services Pvt Ltd having its office at New Delhi. Accused No. 2 is also engaged in the same business in the name and style of Har Khabar Private Limited. Complainant Sh. Rakakant Mittal and the accused no.2 were having friendly relations being in the same business. In the month of October­ November, 2011, accused no. 2 approached Sh. Ramakant Mittal and sought an amount of Rs.seven lacs. Sh. Ramakant Mittal having friendly relations with the accused No. 2 agreed to provide the abovesaid amount and thereafter, got deposited an amount of Rupees five lacs from Dehradun in the month of October­December 2011 through his brother in law Sh. Rakesh Aggarwal in the account of the accused No. 1 that is Mak Mangalam, Mak International Mangalam and Mak Ad International as per the instructions of accused No. 2 being the partner in all the firms. Sh. Ramakant Mittal further paid a sum of Rs. two lacs in cash to the accused CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another in month of October­December, 2011 after arranging the same from his friends/relatives. 3 It is further submitted that accused No. 2 had promised to refund the afore mentioned loan amount within three­four months ie. by January­ February, 2012. However, because of the financial constraints, accused could not refund the aforesaid loan amount and kept on extending time for repayment. Then, in January­2013, accused No. 2 requested the complainant to take back the loan amount in installments and accordingly, accused No. 2 issued three post dated cheques viz cheque bearing no 335538 drawn on Axis Bank Ltd 31.03.2013 of Rs. 1 lakh, cheuqe bearing No. 335539 drawn on Axis Bank, dated 30.04.2013 of Rs. 1 lakh and cheque bearing no. 335540 drawn on Asix Bank Ltd dated 31.05.2013 of Rs. 1 lakh towards the part payment of the loan amount. Accused no. 2 thereafter requested the complainant that he would pay the balance amount in one installment in the month of July­August, 2013. Complainant deposited the cheque bearing No. 335540 drawn on Axis Bank Ltd dated 31.05.2013 in its bank for encashment but the same were returned unpaid with the remarks 'Account closed' vide bank returning memo dated 05.06.2013. 4 It is further submitted in the complaint that legal demand notice dated 03.07.2013 was sent to the accused through counsel for the complainant for demanding the cheque amount. Legal notice was sent by registered CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another post as well as speed post at the residential address of the accused. Through, that notice accused was requested to pay the amount of the cheque within fifteen days from the receipt of the same, failing which accused was also notified that necessary action under Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 would be taken against him. But, in spite of all, the efforts taken by the complainant accused failed to clear the outstanding or to pay the total amount of the cheque in question. 5 Present complaint has been filed by the complainant against the accused u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act. The complaint was filed within limitation on 16.08.2013. During the course of pre summoning evidence, in answer to the court question that what is the mode and the source of payment of Rs. Seven Lacs to the accused, complainant has submitted that his brother in law Mr. Rakesh Aggarwal had transferred Rs. Five lacs from his account to the account of accused No.1 on his instructions. Complainant further submitted that he had paid an amount of Rs. 2 lacs by way of cash to the accused No. 2. Complainant has also submitted that his annual income is Rs. 2, 50,000/­. Thereafter, after taking cognizance by the court, summons qua accused were issued, consequent thereupon, accused entered appearance on 20.12.2013 and was admitted to bail. Notice u/s. 251 CrPC was also framed on 20.12.2013 against the accused to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Accused at the time of framing of the notice, submitted CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another that he had not taken any loan from the complainant and his cheque book containing the cheques in question were stolen and he had already lodged First Information Report in that regard. 6 Thereafter, the matter was listed for complainant's post summoning evidence in terms of the provisions of Section 145(II) of NI Act. Complainant has been examined in post­summoning evidence as CW1. CW1 adopted his affidavit Ex.CW1/2 tendered at the stage of pre­ summoning evidence. CW1 has relied upon following documents already tendered ie. Cheque in question ie cheque bearing No. 335540 dated 31.5.2013 amounting to Rs 1 lacs as Ex. CW1/1, return Memo is Ex.CW1/2, legal notice Ex CW1/3, Registered AD receipts as Ex. CW1/4, speed post receipts as Ex. CW1/5(colly), courier receipts are exhibited as Ex. CW1/6, acknowledgement receipt of AD card as Ex. CW1/7, complaint as Ex. CW1/9. CW 1 was cross­examined at length by the counsel for the accused. CW 1 during his cross­examination submitted that he knew the accused as his friend and that they both were in contact with each other. Complainant has also submitted that accused had given him the cheques of M/s Mak Mangalam in the capacity of the Director. CW1 during his cross­examination has accepted the fact that there no written agreement executed between him and his brother in law regarding the transfer of amount of five lacs to the account of accused. CW1 has submitted that amount in question was deposited in the account of Mak Mangalam, Mak CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another Ad International and Mak International in accordance with the instructions of the accused no. 2. CW1 submitted that he was not aware of the cheque number or the name of the bank through which his brother in law deposited the amount in question. Though, it is submitted by CW 1 that the transaction was shown in the bank statement of his brother in law. CW 1 during his further cross­examination on 21.04.2014 submitted that on is instructions amount of rupees five lacs had been deposited in the companies of the accused namely, Mak Mangalam, Mak Ad International and Mak International in the installments of rupees one lac each. CW 1 has expressed his ignorance with respect to the date of the further handing over of the amount of rupees two lacs to the accused in cash. CW 1 also submitted that there was no written agreement entered between him and accused regarding the transaction of Rupees two lacs in cash and he had not shown that amount in his income tax returns. 7 Statement of accused u/s.313 CrPC was recorded on 22.07.2014. Accused in his statement u/s 313 Cr. PC specifically denied the taking of friendly loan of rupee seven lacs from the complainant for his requirements. Accused has submitted that as he had not taken any money from the complainant so, there is no question of payment of the same. Accused further submitted that his cheque book got lost misplaced and he had filed the complaint in that regard with the police station. Dwarka. Accused in his statement also submitted that his account had CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another already been closed long back and he was not aware of any such transaction. Accused has acceded to the fact of receiving the legal notice and submitted that he has replied the same. 8 Accused led his defence evidence and under the provisions of Section 315 Cr. PC got himself examined as as DW 1. DW 1 in his examination in chief submitted that he is one of the partners in all the three firms, that is, Mak International, Mak Mangalam and Mak Ad Mangalam. DW 1 further deposed that he had closed his Mak Mangalam and Mak Ad Mangalam account as he had lost his cheque book . DW 1 also submitted that he had lodged a complaint in that regard in police chowki, Dwarka Court complex, Sector 10, on 28.12.2012 which is mark A and again after receiving the notice on 17.06.2013 which is mark B. Filing of the same were not denied as per the letter received from Police chowki. Complainant has also not objected to the fact of their filing. Therefore, they are read accordingly. DW 1 specifically submitted that he had not taken any loan either from Sh. Ramakant Mittal or from his company namely SG Media Services Pvt. Ltd. DW 1 further specifically denied of having entered into any of the transactions shown by the complainant in his complaint. DW 1 during his cross­examination submitted that during his journey towards Palam his documents had been misplaced. DW 1 also submitted in his cross­examination that the cheques which were misplaced were signed by him. DW 1 specifically denied the suggestion put CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another to him by the counsel for the complainant regarding the fact of issuing the cheques for consideration. 8A. Final arguments were advanced at length by Sh. Subhash Dixit learned counsel for the complainant and Sh.D. D.Tripathi learned counsel for the accused. 8B. I have bestowed my serious minded consideration to the arguments advanced at length by erudite counsels for both parties and have also punctiliously glimpsed through the relevant material available on record. 9 Henceforth, I shall now step forward to lucubrate the legal provision defining the offence of the dishonour of cheque, which is envisaged under Section 138 of the Act. A mandatory presumption is required to be raised in terms of Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the Act. Section 138 of the Act has three ingredients viz.: a)that there is a legally enforceable debt, b) that the cheque was drawn from the account of the bank for discharge in whole or in part of any debt or other liability which pre supposes a legally enforceable debt and c) that the cheque so issued had been returned due to insufficiency of funds. It is also well settled that (a) the presumption does not go to the extent of presuming the existence of debt and (b) the aforesaid presumption is rebuttable in nature (see Krishna Janardhan Bhatt vs. Pattatraya G.Hegde (SC)2008(1)RCR Criminal 695). Further, it is also well settled that for the rebuttal of the presumptions it is not necessary CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another that the accused must step into the witness box but the presumptions can be rebutted either by cross examination of complainant's witness (see M.S.Narayana Manon vs. State of Kerala & Another AIR 2006 SC 3366 and Krishna Jnardhan Bhat vs. Dattatraya Hegde SC 2008(1) RCR Criminal 695) or even by raising presumptions of fact or law from the material available on record (see Kundan Lal Kala Ram vs. Custodian Evacuee Property, reported as AIR 1961 SC 1316). Standard of proof of rebuttal of presumptions by any person accused of an offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act is preponderance of probabilities. It is not at all necessary for the accused to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubts. Thus, whether the presumption has or has not been rebutted depends on the facts of each case to be analyzed in the light of aforesaid legal principles. Section 139 NI Act is basically an example of reverse onus clause as observed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rangrappu vs. Sri Mohan 2010 3 MLJ(Cri) 547(SC). In the absence of compelling justifications, reverse onus clauses usually impose an evidentiary burden and not a persuasive burden. Therefore, if the accused is able to raise a probable defence which creates doubts about the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution can fail. It is conceivable that in some case accused may not adduce evidence of his own and accused can rely upon the material submitted by the complainant to discharge his burden and thereby raise his defence. CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another 10 Before I locomote on to explicitly render my dictum over the issue, I cannot afford to lose sight of certain facts acknowledged by the complainant in it's pleadings. It is the case of the complainant that accused had issued the cheque bearing number 335540, that is cheque in question dated 31.05.2013 for an amount of Rs. 1,00,000/­ favouring the complainant to clear his partial liability towards the complainant. Accused denied the fact of owing any liability towards the complainant. Infact, it is the defence of the accused that he had never availed any loan from the complainant and the cheques in question got misplaced from him for which he had already lodged the police complaints, one even before the filing of the complaint and another after receiving of the notice. 11 Let us now elaborate the defence taken by the accused in light of the facts of the case, law discussed hereinabove and the examination, cross­ examination of the parties/witnesses involved. On one hand there is presumption in the favour of complainant on the other hand accused has only to prove his defence by the way of preponderance of probabilities and necessarily not beyond reasonable doubt. Complainant has submitted in his complaint as well as in his examination in chief and further in his cross­examination that his brother in law Sh. Rakesh Kumar Aggarwal between the months of October­November, 2011 from Dehradun got deposited an amount of rupees five lakhs to the account of addressee no. CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another 1 M/s Mak Mangalam, M/s Mak Ad International and M/s Mak International Mangalam as per the instructions of accused number 2. Complainant has also submitted that he had paid a further sum of rupees two lacs in cash during the above said period to the accused. Complainant has relied upon the statement of the account of Mr. Rakesh kumar bearing number 1556000100111146 to show the transaction of rupees three lacs to the account of aforementioned no. 2 companies. Complainant has also relied upon the account statement of the account bearing number 3908000100069352 in the name of Mr. Om Prakash and Kanta Devi to show the transaction of rupees one lac to the account of Mak Mangalam. Counsel for the accused at the time of final arguments contended that the fact of the transaction between Sh. Om Prakash and the accused companies were never disclosed by the complainant till the stage of the cross­examination of CW 1. It is further contended by the counsel for the accused that even otherwise all the transactions if taken to be true, that would totalled to rupees four lacs only and not five lacs as claimed by the complainant. It is further contended by the counsel for the accused that the chain of events have never been proved that how the transaction between Mr. Rakesh Kumar, Om Prakash and the present accused, if any, amounts to the consideration of the cheques in question which were in the name of the complainant and his company. Counsel for the complainant on the other hand contended that they have proved the complete chain by producing the statement of account of Mr. Rakesh Kumar on record. CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another No document has been put on record by the complainant to show/establish that the transaction of Rupees five lacs by the relative of the complainant with the accused was taken place on the instructions of the complainant. Even otherwise also both the statements of account relied upon by the complainant does not tally to the amount of rupees five lacs as claimed by the complainant. Infact, complainant himself admitted during his cross­examination that there is no document which would establish or prove any such instructions given by him to his relative. "................... The said amount was deposited by my brother in law on my instructions. There is no written agreement between me and my brother in law regarding the transfer of above said loan amount......................." ".....................My brother in law had deposited the abovesaid amount through cheque. I do not remember the cheque number and the name of the bank from which my brother in law had deposited the amount. The abovesaid transaction was shown in the bank statement of my brother in law.............................. I have deposited the said amount in the name of the companies as instructed through my brother in law's account................." The words 'until the contrary is proved' in Section 118 do not mean that accused must show that instrument is not supported by any any form of consideration but accused has the option to ask the court to consider the non­existence of consideration so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the case, to act upon the supposition that consideration did not exist. For the purpose of rebutting the initial evidentiary burden, the accused can rely on direct evidence or CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another circumstantial evidence or on presumptions of law or fact. Complainant also miserably fails to produce his bank statement to show his financial position or to prove his credibility to hand over the further amount of Rs. 2 lacs in cash as alleged by him handed over to the accused. The pertinent portions of the cross­examination is further elaborated hereinbelow: "..................I had given Rupees Two lacs to the accused in cash in installments during the period of three months as and when required by the accused. .................... I do not remember the exact dates and the amount advanced to the accused during the said period. I had arranged amount from my friends and relatives and from my own pocket. There is no written agreement between me and the accused regarding the transaction of Rs. 2 lacs....................." In Rajesh Shokeen Vs. Sonu Singh Criminal LIP 183/2014 Hon'ble J. Murlidhar expressed his views that ............. Section 138 will be attracted only where a liability is shown to be owned by the Respondent to the complainant. In the present case, the complainant has, apart from contradicting what she stated in the complaint, not produced any evidence whatsoever to show that the sum of Rs.19 lakhs was advanced to the complainant as loan in the years 2011 and 2012 on various dates as alleged by her in the complaint." CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another Extracts from Judgement rendered by Hon'Justice T. S Thakur in Vijay Vs. Laxman and another Criminal Appeal No. 261 of 2013 arising out of SLP No. 6761 of 2010 are also relevant here. "...............The absence of any details of the date on which the loan was advanced as also the absence of any documentary or other evidence to show that any such loan transaction has instead taken place between the parties is a significant circumstance..........". Thus, keeping in view Hon'ble Supreme Court Judgement in Rangappa Vs. Mohan AIR 2010 SC 1898 wherein it was held that in a complaint under Section 138 NI Act an accused can seek to establish that complainant's case is not proved even on a preponderance of probabilities. The accused does not have to himself lead any evidence for that purpose. The presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the NI Act are rebuttable. The burden was on the accused to disprove the presumption u/s.139 NI Act, a burden which in the light of above mentioned discussion has been successfully discharged by him. It is apparent that the accused has furnished cogent reasons which resulted in shifting the burden of proof on the complainant, which the latter failed to discharge. 12 Accused has admitted the fact of receiving the legal notice from the complainant. It is evident that the drawer has failed to make the payment CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another of cheque amount in question within 15 days of the receipt of aforesaid notice, thus, the present complaint U/s 138 NI Act has been initiated against the accused. 13 In the view of the foregoing observation and in view of the evidence, documents put forth and arguments of both the parties, the accused is hereby acquitted for the offence punishable u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act. Reader Announced in the open court On this 9th day of September, 2014 (Manu Vedwan) MM/Special Court( 05) Dwarka Court/New Delhi CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another CC No. 454/14 Ramakant Mittal Vs. M/s Mak Mangalam & another
