DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG149

TITLE: Atma Parkash vs Mirza Riaz Ali on 19 May, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/7540881/



DOMAIN: Property and Land Law

SUBDOMAIN: Land and Property Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, atma, parkash, mirza, riaz, financial, property and land law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI VINOD KUMAR MEENA, CIVIL JUDGE­02 NEW DELHI DISTRICT, PATIALA HOUSE COURTS, NEW DELHI Atma Parkash Vs Mirza Riaz Ali Case ID No. : 02403R1068502008 CC No. : 476/12 Date of Institution : of the Complaint : 30.07.2008 Name and address of Complainant : Atma Parkash s/o Chander Kishan r/o 370 A/2, Chirag Delhi, New Delhi­110017 Name, parentage and address of the accused : Mirza Riaz Ali s/o M. Z. Ali r/o D­2, MCD Colony, Usmanpur Delhi­110053. Offence Complained of : U/s 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 Offence Proved : No Plea of the Accused in his examination. : Pleaded Not guilty, no legal liability. Date of reservation of Order : 30.04.2014 Final Order : Acquitted Date of Order : 19.05.2014 Police Station : Connaught Place JUDGMENT 1. The present complaint was filed by complainant Sh. Atma Prakash and having friendly relations with accused for last many years. It is the case of complainant that in the month of March,2007, the complainant advanced a friendly loan of Rs. 1,45,000/­ to the accused on the assurance of accused that he would repay the amount within a short period. After a period of three months,on demand, accused issued a cheque bearing no.952369 dated 18.06.2008 for Rs. 1,45,000/­ drawn on State bank of India Shahdra Branch, Delhi in order to repay the loan amount. The CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 1 of pages 16 complainant bonafidely presented the impugned cheque to her bankers but the cheque was returned unpaid/dishonoured with remarks "funds insufficient" vide return memo dated 26.06.2008. Therefore, accused failed to discharge his liabilities despite the service of the legal demand notice dated 07.07.2008 within stipulated time. Thus the accused committed an offence U/s 138 NI Act . Bail bond and Notice 2. The court took cognizance of the offence U/s 138 of NI Act and issued process to the accused. The accused was later admitted to court bail. After hearing arguments on Notice, Notice u/s 251 Cr. P.C was served upon to the accused alleging that the impugned cheques were dishonored, to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 3. Thereafter, the case was fixed for complainant's evidence and complainant was directed to supply copy of the affidavit and annexed documents to the accused. Substance of complainant's evidence and cross examination 4. Complainant Atma Prakash examined himself as CW1 and tendered her affidavit along with the documents exhibited as Ex. CW1/A to CW1/E which are as follows: (i) Document Ex. CW1/A is impugned cheque. (ii) Document Ex. CW1/B is return memo issued by accused's bank. (iii) Document Ex. CW1/C is receipt for issuance of legal notice through registered post. (iv) Document Ex. CW1/E Legal demand notice dated 07.07.2008. (v) Document Ex. CW1/D is returned registry receipt AD card. (v) Document Ex. CW1/F is present complaint. 5. CW1 in his cross examination stated that accused was known to him since the year 1982 and both of them had undergone physical training of teaching together. They have never worked together in the same school. However, he voluntary stated that they were posted in different zones and never had visiting terms. CW1 further stated that one Mr. Mehta was their common friend posted in the School in East of Kailash Block B and had mentioned about for a friendly loan of Rs. 1,45,000/­ and same was handedver over in CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 2 of pages 16 cash at the back of shop of one Mr. Anand. He further stated that MR Anand was not present at the time of handing over of impugned loan amount. However, CW1 could not recall the denomination of the currency. CW1 further deposed that loan amount in cash was available with him as he has received a rent amount Rs. 30,000/­ from one of his ancestral property and Rs. 50, 000/­ from one of his private chit ( committee) and remaining amount of Rs. 65,000/­ was with him as his savings. He further stated that the impugned cheque was given by Mr. Mehta to his daughter and she had handed over the same to him ( complainant). All the particular in the cheque were already filled. CW1 further denied the suggestion that the impugned cheque was received by him as blank in all respects or that all the particulars in the impugned cheques were filled by him or anybody else. Thereafter, complainant evidence was closed vide order dated 22.03.2012 and matter was listed for recording statement of accused u/s 313 Cr. P. C Substance of statement of accused recorded U/s 313 Cr. P.C. 6. The evidence of the complainant was put to the accused and his statement recorded U/s. 313 Cr. PC to which he stated that he had not issued the impugned cheque. The impugned cheque bears his signatures, however, he has not filled the other details in the impugned cheque. He had handed over the impugned cheque as blank to the complainant in the year 2002. He has not received any legal demand notice. He further stated that complainant was his good friend and both of them were colleagues. He had handed over the impugned cheque to the complainant in the year 2002 for the purpose of withdrawing his salary from his account as complainant was going to bank and thereafter, he forget about the impugned cheque. The accused preferred to lead defence evidence and matter was listed for defence eivdnce. Substance of defence evidence 7. Accused Mirza Riaz Ali examined himself as DW1 and stated that the complainant is known to him for the last more than 30 years and they both were Physical Education teachers in Municipal Corporation of Delh and very close to each other. He further stated that there was a general practice in MCD that teachers used to get their salaries always late as there was no fixed date for distribution of Salary and same was to be transferred to the bank direct from the department. One day the complainant was going to the bank i.e SBI CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 3 of pages 16 bank, GT road, Shahdra and he had handed over a blank cheque duly signed by him ( accused) and requested him to withdraw his salary from the bank. The cheque was handed over to the complainant in the year 2002 . When he had asked the complainant about the amount withdrawn from his account, he informed that he could not withdraw the amount because the salary was not deposited in the account. DW1 further stated that he came to know about the above mentioned cheque the day when he had received notice from the Court about the present case that the above mentioned cheque has been misused by the complainant in the year 2008. There was no legal liability towards the complainant and the complainant has misused the cheque after a gap of about seven years from the date when it was handed over to the complainant. In his cross­examination he stated that he was posted in Shahdra zone in the year 2002 at Brahampuri I st shift and complainant Atma Prakash was posted as an inspector in South zone, Delhi in MCD. However, in South Zone there were two office one at Lajpat Nagar and other office in Green Park, from where he used to function his activities. The impugned cheque in question is drawn on his SBI Bank having branch at G. T. Road Shahdra. He has not received any legal notice. He used to withdraw the amount from his bank account through cheque by giving the same to any teacher known to him. He could not recall whether he used to sign the cheque on the back while handing over the same to anyone. Till the year 2004­2005 he used to withdraw the money by giving the cheque by signing it and blank in all other respect to any teacher known to him. DW1 admitted that he had taken loan amount from MCD Employees Society, Kaccha Bagh, Janta Cooperative Bank Ltd. Delhi and Delhi State Cooperative Bank. He further Voluntary stated that he had repaid the loan amount in the year 2010. He further stated that the loan was repaid by way of attachment of my salary and retiremental funds. He also denied receiving of the legal demand notice or that the impugned cheque was given to repay the loan amount . Accused also examined Sh. Naresh Kumar, Senior Assistant, SBI, as DW2. DW2 produced the statement of account for the period from 01.05.2008 till 30.06.2008 and from 01.07.2008 to 31.12.2008 pertaining to account of accused vide Ex. DW2/1 ( colly). He stated that impugned cheque in question was not CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 4 of pages 16 produced for encashment in G.T. road branch and return memo Ex CW1/B was not issued by G.T. Road Branch. In his cross­examination DW2 admitted that the impugned cheque in question was deposited for encashment after the year 2005 and same could be produced in any branch of SBI. He further admitted that return memo Ex. CW1/B was issued from the Lajpat Nagar Branch of SBI. DW2 also stated it to be correct that account holder i.e accused himself has withdrawn Rs. 10,000/­ on 19.05.2008. Judgment and Reasons 8. Final arguments adduced on behalf of both the parties. Before coming to the factual matrix of the case it is pertinent to mention here the legal position regarding the cases pertaining to the section 138 of the N. I. Act with the help of the case laws as discussed below. It has been observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rangappa v Sri Mohan1, that ordinarily in cheque bouncing cases, what the courts have to consider is whether the ingredients of the offence enumerated in Section 138 of the Act have been met and if so, whether the accused was able to rebut the statutory presumption contemplated by Section 139 of the Act. It was further observed that the test to be applied in cases U/s 138 NI Act is one of preponderance of probabilities, which has been held in various other case law as well. For the purpose of reaching a decision in the present matter, it is thus important to first decide whether the complainant has been able to fulfill the ingredients as enumerated under section 138 NI Act and if yes, then decide if the accused has been able to rebut the statutory presumption contemplated by Section 139 of NI Act. Further in M/s Kumar Exports v. M/s Sharma Carpets 2 it has been observed as follows:­ The accused in a trial U/s 138 NI Act has two options. He can either show that consideration and debt did not exist or that under the particular circumstances of the case the non existence of consideration or debt is so 1 2010 Cri. L.J. 2871 2 AIR 2011 SC 1518 CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 5 of pages 16 probable that a prudent man ought to suppose that no consideration or debt existed. To rebut the statutory presumption the accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The essential ingredients which need be proved for constituting the offence under Section 138 NI Act were discussed in the case Jugesh Sehgal v. Shamsher Singh Gogi3. In view of the judgment and also the provisions U/s 138 NI Act, an offence U/s 138 NI Act is committed when a person draws a cheque on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, and that cheque is returned by the bank unpaid due to "insufficient funds" or "exceeds arrangements" or any other such reasons. Further, as per proviso to Section 138 NI Act, the drawer shall be liable only if; A) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of validity, whichever is earlier; B) the holder of the cheque makes a demand for the payment of the cheque amount by giving a legal notice to the drawer within 30 days of receipt of information by him from the bank regarding dishonor; C) the drawer of the cheque fails to make the payment to the drawee within 15 days from receipt of legal notice. 9. On perusal of the file it is seen that the cheques bearing no.952369 dated 18.06.2008 for an amount of Rs. 1,45,000/­ drawn on State Bank of India, Shahdara, New Delhi was given to the complainant allegedly towards the repayment of friendly loan amount. However, when the complainant presented the impugned cheque to her bankers the same cheque was returned unpaid/dishonoured with remarks mentioned on a separate Memo "insufficient funds". Thereafter, a legal notice dated 07.07.2008 was sent to the accused within stipulated time, however, accused failed to discharge his liabilities despite the service of the legal demand notice within stipulated time i.e 15 days from the service of legal notice. Thus the complainant has filed sufficient evidence to raise the presumption u/s 139 NI Act. 3. 2009 (9) SCALE 455 CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 6 of pages 16 10. The issue is whether the accused has been able to rebut the presumption U/s 139 NI Act. In order to answer this question, it is important to see the cross examination of the complainant and defence of the accused. 11. The documents filed by the complainant and the accused have been carefully perused. After going through all the records placed in the case file by both the parties, evidence adduced by both the parties and after hearing the submissions of both the parties, it came to the fore that the accused is relying on the two fold defences. The first defence of the accused is that he has also not received legal demand notice and second defence of the accused is that the accused has never taken the friendly or any other loan from the complainant and this impugned cheque have been misused by the complainant and the present case is based on totally false and concocted facts. Plea of Defence 12. As far as first plea of defence of the accused is concerned i.e no legal demand notice has ever been received by him. It is stated by the accused in his statement of accused that he has not received the legal demand notice. It is submitted by ld. Counsel for accused that legal demand notice have not been served upon the accused; he further submitted that no proof regarding the service of the legal notice has been placed on records by the complainant which shows that the complainant has not sent any legal demand notice to the accused; Per contra it is submitted by ld. Counsel for complainant that the plea of the accused that he has not received the legal demand notice is not sustainable as he has filed the proof regarding the service which is exhibited as Ex. CW1/C ( colly.) as well proof regarding the delivery of the legal demand notice exhibited as Ex. CW1/D ( colly). To elucidate the position regarding the service of the legal demand notice. It is pertinent to quote here the judgment passed by Hon. High Court of Delhi, titled as HDFC Bank Ltd. Vs. Amit Kumar Singh4. The relevant para reads as under:­ "...14. Section 138 (b), N. I. Act is unambiuous in requiring a demand in writing to be made by the 4. 160 (2009) Delhi Law Times 478 CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 7 of pages 16 payee by "giving a notice in writing to the drawer of the cheque within 30 days of receipt of intimation that the cheque has dishonoured". The expression pf "giving of notice" has to be read in the context of Section 27 of the GC Act. In terms of the said provisions whenever a statute uses the words "served" or "give" or "sent" unless a different intention appears, service would be presumed "property" addressing, numbering and positing by registered post a letter containing the document. Unless the contrary is proved service would be deemed to have been effected at that time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary Course. ...16. The above legal position is consistent with the legislative intent of the Parliament in enacting Section 144, N. I. Act. Although this provision talks of the mode of service of summons to either a witness or an accused under the N. I. Act, this Court finds no reason why the same standard should not be insisted upon for service of legal notice upon the accused by the complainant prior to the filing of the complaint. The reason for this that where ever a summoning order is passed and summons are sent to the accused, it would be sent at the same address shown for accused in the complaint. This address ought not to be any different from the address in the legal notice. It is therefore a continuous chain of events. First there is dishonour of the cheque. Next it the legal notice to be sent to the drawer within 30 days of the payee receiving an intimation from the Bank of the dishonour of the cheque. Such legal notice in writing has to be addressed to the drawer available with the complainant such notice. Such notice has to be received by the drawer and he should fail to make payment within 15 days after receipt of such notice. This chain thereafter, continues into the next stage following the failure to make the payment. The complainant or the drawee then approaches the criminal Court with a complaint in which he will implead as accused, the drawer of the cheque, with the address being shown as the same to which the legal CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 8 of pages 16 notice was sent. The summon, therefore, goes to the same address. ... 24. At this juncture, this Court would also like to emphasize that even under Section 27, GC Act the requirement is that the notice must be "properly" addressed. The word "properly" obviously envisages the notice being sent to the correct present address of the noticee. The complainant will not be able to demonstrate before the Court that it had "properly' addressed the noticee unless it is able to produce the proof of delivery in the form of a postal endorsement or certificate of the courier agency or an internet generated delivery report or some other proof of delivery." (emphasis supplied). After going through the above mentioned observations made by the Hon'ble Justice S. Murlidharan in the above mentioned case and after going through the averments made by both the parties during the Course of evidence and after going through all the documents it is clear that it is incumbent upon the complainant to prove that he has sent a legal demand notice by producing the delivery report. In the present case complainant has not only filed the proof regarding the service of the legal demand notice but also as proof regarding the delivery of the legal demand notice. To make the position here more clear, the Court find it pertinent to mention here the observations made by Hon'ble Supreme Court in D.Vinod Shivappa Versus Nanda Belliappa5 wherein it was made clear that in case where the notice has been returned unclaimed or a notice has been returned after having been refused by the accused, the principle incorporated in Section 27 of General Clauses Act can profitably be imported. The relevant para reads as under:­ " 15 ... if the complainant is able to prove that the drawer of the cheque knew about the notice and deliberately evaded service and got a false endorsement made only to defeat the process of law, the Court shall presume service of the notice. This, however, is a matter of evidence and proof. Thus, even 5. (2006) 6 SCC 456 CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 9 of pages 16 in a case where the notice is returned with the endorsement that premises has always been found locked or the addressee was not available at the time of postal delivery,it will be open to the complainant to prove at the trial by evidence that the endorsement is not correct and that the addressee, namely, the drawer of the cheque, with the knowledge of the notice had deliberately avoided to receive the notice." In view of the observations made by the Hon. Superior Courts as mentioned above the complainant has to file proof regarding the delivery or proof regarding the fact that same was sent but returned undelivered or refused. It is also pertinent to mention here that complainant has filed the receipt and AD of the registered post w.r.t service of legal demand notice to the accused. Accordingly defence no.1 raised by the accused does not hold water. Second Defence. 13. As far as second plea of defence is concerned i.e the accused has never taken the friendly or any other loan from the complainant and the impugned cheque have been misused by the complainant and the present case is based on totally false and concocted facts, it is submitted by ld. counsel for complainant that in the month of March 2007, accused approached complainant for a friendly loan of Rs 1,45,000/­ to full fill his urgent needs; Complainant gave a friendly loan of Rs. 1,45,000/­ for helping the accused and accused gave the impugned cheque in question to discharge his legal liability of 1, 45,000/­. However, this impugned cheque was dishonoured due to the reason of insufficiency of funds and all the legal formalities have been duly complied with. Per contra it is submitted by ld. counsel for accused that the present case is based on false and concocted facts just to harass the accused persons and to extort illegal money from the accused. It is further averred by ld. counsel for accused that accused handed over the cheque with due signature and blank in all other respect in year 2002 to withdraw his salary from the bank account and complainant retained the impugned cheque with himself with ulterior motives and used it in year 2008, just to take illegal money from the accused. It is also submitted by ld. counsel for complainant that no loan was given by the complainant to the accused is substantiated from the fact that complainant has not produced any endorsement, written receipt or any witnesses to prove the alleged loan. It is also CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 10 of pages 16 submitted by ld. counsel for accused that there are material contradictions in the evidence of the complainant which gives cogent indications that the complainant has filed the present complaint case on false and concocted facts. After hearing submissions of both the parties and after going through the complaint, evidence by way of affidavit and cross­ examination of CW1, it is observed by the Court that in the complaint it is averred by the complainant that accused handed over the impugned cheque to discharge his legal liability. The relevant para is quoted here in as under:­ "...On demand after three months accused had issued a cheque bearing NO. 952368 dated 18.06.2008 for Rs. 1,45,000/­ drawn on State Bank of India, Shahdara Branch, Delhi in order to satisfy his debts and liabilities..." In his cross­examination as CW1 it was averred by the complainant as CW1 that impugned cheque was sent by the accused to somebody; then he averred that the cheque was handed over to him by his daughter and cheque was handed over to his daughter by one Mr. Mehta. The relevant paras are quoted herein as under. "... The impugned cheque was sent by the accused to somebody. The impugned cheque was handed over to me by my daughter. My daughter was a teacher in a school in East of Kailash where Mr. Mehta was principal. Ms. Mehta had handed over the impugned cheque to my daughter..." After going through the above mentioned averrements it is observed by the court that the complainant is not consistent w.r.t fact as to who has handed over the impugned cheque to him. It is very strange that despite the alleged fact that cheque was handed over by Mr.Mehta to his daughter and by his daughter to him, the complainant has not produced them as witness to substantiate the fact. It is also pertinent to mention here that in his complaint it is averred by complainant that accused approached the complainant in the month of March 2007 for a friendly loan; however, in his cross­ examination as CW1, it is averred by the complainant that one Mr. Mehta called him in a school of East of Kailash to talk about the CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 11 of pages 16 friendly loan. Keeping in mind the averrments and the contradictions found in the averment of the complainant, this fact seems to be a relevant fact and the same does not found a mention in the complaint itself. It is also observed by the Court that whole of the amount has been paid in cash and that too at the first request without mentioning of the specific need for which the alleged amount was being taken and that too in the absence of any person and without taking any written receipt or written acknowledgment and without any interest. The relevant para of the cross­examination of CW1 is hereby quoted as under for the sake of clarity. "...The alleged friendly loan was handed over in cash at the shop of one Mr. Anand in East of Kailash. The money was not advanced in presence of Mr. Anand. vol. the loan amount was advanced in the office of Mr. Anand on the back side of his shop. I do not remember the denomination of the currency..." 14. After going through the above mentioned averments,Court is of the view that it is very strange that complainant has not taken any receipt for the alleged impugned loan of Rs. 1,45,000/­ and Court also found it very strange that the alleged payment towards the loan was made by the complainant in the shop of a third person who was not present at the impugned time of payment of loan. It is also pertinent to mention here that sum of Rs. 1,45,000/­ is a substantial sum and no reason w.r.t urgent need has been asked from the accused or averred by the complainant in the complaint and no interest had been allegedly taken or agreed to be taken by the complainant from the accused despite the admitted fact that both were not having any visiting terms. After going through the above mentioned the Court found that complaint has been made in a very casual manner and no detail or averment for advancing the loan has been provided. The Court also observed that the complainant was not consistent on his plea through out the trial. From the aforesaid discussion it has been crystallized that the complainant's story of loan transaction is preposterous and does not inspire the confidence of the Court. CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 12 of pages 16 15. It is now trite that the accused may rebut the presumptions from the circumstances of the case and need not lead positive evidence for rebuttal. At this stage, the court deem it fit to quote certain observations as made by Hon.Supreme Court in Krishan Janardhan Bhat vs. Dattatraya G. Hegde6. "...20. Indisputably, a mandatory presumption is required to be raised in terms of Section 118 (b) and Section 139 of the Act. Section 13 (1) of the Act defines "negotiable instrument" to mean " a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque payable either to order or to bearer." Section 138 of the Act has three ingredients, viz: (i)that there is a legally enforceable debt; (ii)that the cheque was drawn from the account of bank for discharge in whole or in part of any debt or other liability which presupposes a legally enforceable debt; and (iii)that the cheque so issued had been returned due to insufficiency of funds. 21. The proviso appended to the said section provides for compliance of legal requirements before a complaint petition can be acted upon by a Court of law. Section 139 of the Act merely raised a presumption in regard to the second aspect of the matter. Existence of legally recoverable debt is not a matter of presumption Under Section 139 of the Act. It merely raises a presumption in favour of a holder of the cheque that the same has been issued for discharge of any debt or other liability. 24. In Bharat Barrel & Drum Manufacturing Company vs. Amin Chand Pyarelal 1999 AIR SCW 636, para 12. interpreting Section 118 (a) of the Act, this Court opined: "Upon consideration of various judgments as noted herein above, the position of law which emerges is that once execution of the promissory note is admitted, the presumption under Section 118 (a) would arise that it is supported by a consideration. Such a presumption is rebuttal. The defendant can prove the non­existence of 6. AIR 2008, Supreme Court 1325 CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 13 of pages 16 a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the defendant is proved to have discharged the initial onus of proof showing that the existence of consideration was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the plaintiff who will be obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and upon its failure to prove would dis­entitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. The burden upon the defendant of proving the non­existence of the consideration can be either direct or by bringing on record the preponderance of probabilities by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies. In such an even, the plaintiff is entitled under law to rely upon all the evidence led in the case including that of the plaintiff as well. In case, where the defendant fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non­ existence of the consideration, the plaintiff would invariably to be held entitled to the benefit of presumption arising under Section 118 (a) in his favour. The Court may not insist upon the defendant to disprove the existence of consideration by leading direct evidence as the existence of negative evidence is neither possible not contemplated and even if led, is to be seen with a doubt..." (emphasis supplied) 25. Furthermore, whereas prosecution must prove the guilt of an accused beyond all reasonable doubt, the standard of proof so as to prove a defence on the part of an accused is "preponderance of probabilities". Inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only from the materials brought on records by the parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies.(emphasis supplied) A statutory presumption has an evidentiary value. The question as to whether the presumption whether stood rebutted or not, must, therefore, be determined keeping in view the other evidences on record. For the said purpose, stepping into the witness box by the appellant is not imperative. In a case of this nature, where the chances of false implication cannot be ruled out, the background fact and the conduct of the parties together CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 14 of pages 16 with their legal requirements are required to be taken into consideration." 16. In Kumar Exports v. Sharma Carpets7 discussing at length the question of the rebuttal of the presumption, it was observed: "....Apart from adducing direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not supported by consideration or that he had not incurred any debt or liability, the accused may also rely upon circumstantial evidence and if the circumstances so relied upon are compelling, the burden may likewise shift again on to the complainant. The accused may also rely upon presumptions of fact, for instance, those mentioned in Section 114 of the Evidence Act to rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of The Act. The accused has also an option to prove the nonexistence of consideration and debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial...." 17. In Birender Singh Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) and Anr. 8 it was held: "5. There is no doubt that the burden rests on the accused to rebut the presumption as raised under Sections 139 and 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act. However, this presumption can be rebutted by the accused not merely by examining his own witnesses but even by cross­examination of the complainant and his witnesses and bringing out on record, through cross­examination, that the complainant was altar and there was no privity of contract between the complainant and the accused and cheques were misused." 7. (2009) 2 SCC 513 8 .I (2008) BC 452, CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 15 of pages 16 Conclusion 18. As quoted above, the standard of proof so as to establish a defence on the part of an accused is 'preponderance of probabilities'. Inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only from the materials brought on record by the parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies. After carefully scrutinizing and analyzing the evidence together with the circumstances discussed above,there is no doubt in the mind of Court that the accused has come up with a highly probable defence. The Court is of the opinion that there is sufficient material on record to displace the presumptions raised under The Act. In totality of the circumstances and the discussions above, the Court is of the considered view that the accused has proved his defence on the basis of preponderance of probabilities and successfully rebutted the presumptions raised under The Act. Decision 15. In the considered opinion of the Court, in view of the legal provisions and case law discussed, the accused is not held guilty for the offence u/s 138 NI Act and is accordingly acquitted for the offence u/s 138 N. I. Act. Pronounced in open Court (Vinod Kumar Meena) on 19th May 2014 Civil Judge­02/NDD PHC/New Delhi CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 16 of pages 16 CC No. 476/12 Atma Prakash vs. Mirza Riaz Ali 17 of pages 16
