DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG106

TITLE: Atul Kumar Singh vs . B.N. Singhvi on 29 January, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/51319766/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, atul, kumar, singh, singhvi, january, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

­: 1 :­ IN THE COURT OF MS. MANU VEDWAN, LD. METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE : SPECIAL COURT - 09 (NI ACT) : DWARKA : DELHI ATUL KUMAR SINGH VS. B.N. SINGHVI Complaint Case No. : 3662/13 P.S. : Dwarka Sector­23 U/s. : 138 N.I.Act J U D G M E N T 1. Name of the complainant : Atul Kumar Singh s/o Shri Devender Prashad Singh, r/o B­29/30, M.B.R Enclave, pochan Pur Ext., Sector­23, Dwarka, New Delhi­75 2. Name of the accused and address B.N. SInghvi Presently Residing at : I­201, Green Valley <span class="hidden_text" id="span_1"> Apartment, Plot No. 18</span> Sector­22, Dwarka, New Delhi, Near Mount Carmel School 3. Offence complained of : U/s.138 N.I.Act 4. Plea of accused : Pleaded not guilty 5. Final Order : Acquitted. 6. Date of Reserving the : 18­1­2014 Judgment 7. Date of Order : 29­1­2014 ­: 2 :­ Date of Institution of case : 22.05.2013 Date of Decision of the case : 29­01­2014 BRIEF SKETCH OF THE CASE 1. Vide this judgment, I shall dispose of the complaint u/s.138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 against the accused. 2. The case of the complainant as per the complaint is that complainant is a law abiding citizen of India working with M/S AVON TRIP. Com at G­67, Manish Global Mall, Sector 22, Dwarka, New Delhi­110075 as commission agent. Accused is having good friendship with complainant and used to purchase air tickets from M/s AVON TRIP. Com through the complainant. It is submitted by the complainant in his complaint that accused purchased five air tickets for journey from Delhi to Mumbai and Mumbai to Delhi from M/S AVON TRIP. Com through the complainant with the understanding that he would make the payments of the ticket after 15 to 20 days. 3. It is further submitted by the complainant that accused had issued a cheque bearing no.198780 dt.1­3­2013 amounting to ­: 3 :­ Rs.60,000/­ drawn on HDFC Bank, Manish Global Mall, Dwarka, New Delhi in the favour of complainant to clear his liability. It is further submitted that on request of accused complainant had presented the cheque before his bank for encashment on 04­3­2013. The cheque was dishonoured on the ground of insufficient funds. Complainant had informed about the dishonour of cheque to the accused. On the assurance of accused, complainant again represented the cheque for encashment on 08­3­2013. 4. It is further submitted that the abovesaid cheque was again presented for encashment with banker of complainant, i.e. State Bank of India, Sector 23, Dwarka, New Delhi but the same was again returned unpaid with the remarks "Insufficient Funds" vide its Cheque Return Memo dated 09.3.2013. Thereupon, complainant sent a legal notice dated 07.4.2013 to the accused under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act. By virtue of legal notice dtd. 07­04­2013 the accused was requested to clear the outstanding amount and pay the amount of the cheque within 15 days from the receipt of the legal notice. However, despite legal notice, the accused failed to make the payment of the dishonoured cheque to the complainant company till date. Instead, accused choses to send the false and frivolous reply dated 26­4­2013 of the legal notice of the complainant. ­: 4 :­ 5. The complaint was filed within limitation on 22­05­2013 pursuant to which summons were issued, consequent thereupon the accused entered appearance and was admitted to bail. Notice u/s.251 CrPC was framed against the accused on 5­10­2013 to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Thereafter, the matter was listed for evidence. Complainant has been examined as CW1 and adopts his pre summoning evidence as post summoning evidence. 6. CW1 deposes in his examination­in­chief same facts as are deposed by him in his pre summoning evidence. CW 1 has relied upon following documents - cheque in question Ex.CW1/1, cheque returning memos dt.5­3­2013 is Ex.CW1/2 and returning memo dt.09­3­2013 is Ex.CW1/3, legal demand notice dt. 7­4­2013 is Ex.CW1/4, postal receipt is Ex.CW1/5, reply to legal notice is Ex.CW1/6 and complaint is Ex.CW1/8. CW1 was cross­examined at length by the accused. 7. Statement of accused u/s.313 CrPC recorded in which accused accepted the fact of buying tickets from M/S Avon Trip. Com. Accused has further accepted in his statement that he had purchased four tickets through Mr. Atul Kumar Singh to visit Mumbai, payments of which were to be made in accordance with the costs printed on the tickets. Accused further submitted in his statement that he was not ­: 5 :­ inconsonance with the amount quoted as the same is different from what was printed on the ticket. It is also submitted by the accused in his statement that the cheque in question was given as security to the complainant. Accused also submitted that he had no transaction with the complainant and thus did not owe any liability towards the complainant accused has sent the reply of the legal notice of the complainant in that terms.. Accused also submitted in his statement that actual bill was never handed over, to him so he did not make any payment to M/S Avon Trip.com. 8. The accused got examined himself as DW­1 on his written request expressed by moving an application u/s 315 Cr. P.C. DW 1, in his examination in chief deposed that being lawyer by profession, he had to travel to various High Courts in India. DW 1 further deposed that he used to purchase tickets from M/s Avon Trip.com since two years. Theticket as shown for payment due on 23­12­2012 is not correct but written ticket for 24.12.2012 amounting to Rs.11,600/­ was booked by the complainant on telephone and upon receipt of the PNR, I got the ticket printoutat the airport only. DW 1 deposed in his evidence that as regards the ticket for 29.12.2012 the amount shown at para 4 of the complaint is exorbitant because the ticket printout showed Rs. 11,250/­ as against the amount shown as Rs. 13,500/­. For 30.12.2012 the ticket that was ­: 6 :­ issued to him was on special fare of Rs. 6,000/­ and thus, even this entry for this ticket of Rs. 8,300/­ is anamolous. The ticket for 01.1.2013 was booked at Rs. 11,000/­ as against as 11,500/­ shown in details at para 4. Ticket for 2­1­2013 was never booked by either the complainant or M/s Avon Trip. Com since he had purchased it at the Bombay Airport itself. Thus, according to him an amount of about Rs. 46,650/­ was due and payable whereas the agent M/s Avon Trip. Com was claiming about Rs. 65,000/­ on different rates for which neither the bills were issued to him nor the ticket printouts were forwarded to him. DW 1 further deposed in his evidence that on the request of the complainant, he had secured the complainant by handing over a blank cheque duly signed by him towards the security. DW 1 also deposed that he had clarified in his reply to the legal notice sent by the complainant that he would make the payment only after receiving the bill from M/s Avon Trip.com. DW 1 further deposed that he had no direct liability to discharge his debts towards the complainant. DW 1 was cross examined at length by the counsel for the complainant. 9. Before adverting to the facts of case in hand it would be pertinent to reproduce the relevant provisions of Section 138, 139 and Section 118(a) of Negotiable Instruments Act at the very ­: 7 :­ outset, which reads as follows :­ Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act reads as follows: 138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account - Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for [a term which may be extended to two years], or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless­ ­: 8 :­ (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, [within thirty days] of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation - For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability.] Section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act reads as follows: Presumption in favour of holder - It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that6 ­: 9 :­ the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to in section 138 for discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. Section 118 of Negotiable Instruments Act reads as follows: Presumption as to negotiable instruments - Until the contrary is proved, the following presumptions shall be made:­ (a) of consideration - that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration, and that every such instrument, when it has been accepted, endorsed, negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for consideration; 10. Regarding the scope of presumptions u/s.118(a) and u/s.139 of the NI Act, there is no doubt about the settled legal position that once the signatures on the cheque are admitted by the drawer of the cheque, there arises a presumption in favour of the payee/holder in due course in terms of Section 139 and 118(a) of Negotiable Instruments Act that the cheque has been issued for consideration and in discharge of legally enforceable debt or liability. It is also well settled that (a) the presumption does not go to the extent of presuming the existence of debt and (b) the ­: 10 :­ aforesaid presumption is rebuttable in nature (see Krishna Janardhan Bhatt vs. Pattatraya G.Hegde (SC)2008(1) RCR Criminal 695. Further, it is also well settled that for the rebuttal of the presumptions it is not necessary that the accused must step into the witness box but the presumptions can be rebutted either by cross examination of complainant's witness (see M.S.Narayana Manon vs. State of Kerala & Another AIR 2006 SC 3366 and Krishna Jnardhan Bhat vs. Dattatraya Hegde SC 2008(1) RCR Criminal 695 or even by raising presumptions of fact or law from the material available on record (see Kundan Lal Kala Ram vs. Custodian Evacuee Property, reported as AIR 1961 SC 1316). In Mallavarapu Kasivisweswara Rao Vs. Thadikonda Ramulu Firm and Others AIR 2008 SC 2898 it was held as under: "12. Under Section 118 (a) of the Negotiable Instruments Act, the court is obliged to presume, until the contrary is proved, that the promissory note was made for consideration. It is also a settled position that the initial burden in the regard lies on the defendant to prove the non­existence of consideration by bringing on record such facts and circumstances which would lead the Court to believe the non­existence of the consideration either by direct evidence or by preponderance of probabilities showing ­: 11 :­ that the existence of consideration was improbable, doubtful or illegal. ... ... ... The bare denial of the passing of the consideration apparently does not appear to be any defence. Something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the benefit of shifting the onus of proving to the plaintiff. To disprove the presumption, defendant has to bring on record such facts and circumstances upon consideration of which the court may either believe that the consideration did not exist or its non­existence was so probable that a prudent man would, under the circumstances of the case, shall act upon the plea that it did not exist. ... ... ..." 11. Standard of proof of rebuttal of presumptions by any person accused of an offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act is preponderance of probabilities and It is not at all necessary for the accused to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubts. Though, bare denial or bald suggestions given by the accused would not be sufficient to rebut the aforesaid presumption (see Hiten P. Dalal vs. Bratindranath Banerjee AIR 2010 SC 1898). Thus, whether the presumption has or has not ­: 12 :­ been rebutted depends on the facts of each case to be analyzed in the light of aforesaid legal principles. 12. Question which is to determined here is whether the accused handed over the cheque in question to the complainant was given in discharge of any legal debt or liability. Counsel for the complainant has contended that accused has handed over the cheque in question to the complainant against his liability of paying the ticket amount purchased through complainant from M/s Avon Trip.com. It is the case of the complainant that the accused in discharge of his liability issued cheque bearing no. 198780 dtd. 1­3­2013 drawn on HDFC, Dwarka, New Delhi for a sum of Rs. 60,000/­with the assurance that the said cheque would be encashed upon presentation. Accused being the counsel represented himself on the other hand, contended that he had given the cheque which is Ex.CW1/1, as security cheque on the request of the complainant and not for the discharging of any pending liability as alleged by the complainant. 13. Written submissions filed by the complainant and the accused perused carefully. Firstly, it is submitted by the complainant in his written arguments that accused has settled the matter with the complainant in the mediation cell but fails to honour that settlement. It is also submitted by the complainant that accused has himself admitted in his reply to the legal notice of the ­: 13 :­ complainant that cheque was issued to the complainant in his name. Thus, there is no question of any cheque given as security. It is further submitted by the complainant that the cheque was put up for encashment only at the request of the accused so again there is no question of accused not knowing the fact of dishonour of the cheque. With respect to the question of difference in the amount of the tickets raised by the accused, complainant submitted that accused had issued the cheque in question of the sum of Rs.60,000/­. The difference of the amount as per the accused is of Rs.5050/­ and total amount shown in para 4 of the complaint is of Rs.65,300/­ so the same has been explained. It is also submitted by the complainant in his written arguments that accused had admitted that he had purchased /booked the air ticket on telephone from the complainant. It is also submitted by the complainant that since check­in of the passenger starts two hours before the scheduled departure of the flight and after the check­in status no ticket is sold by the airlines. Thus, the submissions offered by the accused that since the flight offered by the complainant was after two hours, he had purchased the ticket from the airport counter, is totally false. Infact, no ticketing agent has their office at the airport counter. While, accused submits in his written submissions that the bill pertaining to the cheque amount not produced by the complainant. The print outs of the tickets have never been ­: 14 :­ certified by the complainant in accordance with law. Thus, in the absence of the legally enforcible debt or liability there can not be any presumption mandated u/s 139 of NI Act. It is further submitted by the accused that complainant does not have anything to do with the payment liability of the accused towards the M/S Avon Trip.com. The tickets were in the name of M/S Avon Trip.com who paid the amount to the Airlines clearly makes out a case forth rebuttal of that presumption. There is neither any list established between the complainant and M/S Avon Trip.com nor is there any authorisation or approval from M/S Avon Trip.com to receive the amount from the accused towards his liability which is basically towards the M/S Avon Trip.com not towards the complainant. It is also submitted by the accused that complainant has himself stated that he is commission agent of M/S Avon Trip.com. Not even a single document/witness has been put forward by the complainant to establish the same fact. It is also submitted by the complainant that the ticket amount if calculated, does not totals to the amount mentioned in the cheque in question. 14. It is submitted by the complainant in his complaint as well as in his evidence that accused had purchased tickets from the complainant and issued the cheque in question to bear that liability. Complainant himself submitted in his complaint that tickets were purchased by the accused from M/s Avon Trip.com ­: 15 :­ through him being the commission agent. Though, even after availing ample effective opportunities complainant miserably fails to put on record any relevant authority in that regard i.e. any letter or any other document from M/s Avon Trip.com which will show his ability/power to issue the tickets on behalf of M/s Avon Trip.com and to ask for clearing the liability from the customers of M/s Avon Trip.com. Accused has vehemently raised the issue of the issuance of the air tickets as well as the total price of all the air tickets issued in the name of the accused, in the cross examination of the complainant as well as at the time of his recording of statement u/s 313 Cr.P.C and in his defence evidence. Even having effective opportunities to produce the relevant document viz. bill or even the air ticket itself, complainant miserably fails to produce the same. Submissions of the complainant in his written arguments that accused has settled the matter in the mediation cell has no relevance in the eyes of law as mediation proceedings are entirely distinct from the present case. Submissions of the complainant that after check­in starts no ticket is sold by the airline, has no relevance in the eyes of laws unless proved by the relevant piece of the evidence. 15. Thus in the light of above mentioned discussion complainant miserably fails to divulge the existence of legally enforceable debt or liability of the accused. Accused has from inception onwards ­: 16 :­ contested the factum of existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability. In the absence of compelling justification reverse onus clauses usually impose an evidentiary burden and not a persuasive burden. Therefore, if the accused is able to raise a probable defence which creates about the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution can fail (Rangappa vs. Mohan 2010 Cri.L.J. 2871) In Builders vs Arihant Fertilizers & Chemicals and Anr., (2008) 2 SCC 321, Negotiable Instruments Act envisages that: "...application of the penal provisions which needs to be construed strictly. Therefore, even if two view in the matter are possible, the Court should lean in favour of the view which is beneficial to the accused. This is more so, when such a view will also advance the legislative intent, behind enactment of this criminal liability." Further, in view of the ratio decidendi in the judgment passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Krishna Janardhan Bhat vs Dattatraya G. Hedge, (2008) 4 SCC 54, the prosecution must prove the guilt of an accused beyond reasonable doubt whereas the standard of proof on the part of ­: 17 :­ the accused is "preponderance of probabilities". The burden was on the accused to disprove the presumption u/s.139 NI Act, a burden which in the light of abovementioned discussion has been successfully discharged by him. It is apparent that the accused has furnished cogent reasons which resulted in shifting the burden of proof on the complainant, which the latter failed to discharge. 16. In the view of the foregoing observation and in view of the evidence, documents put forth and arguments of both the parties, the accused is hereby acquitted for the offence punishable u/s. 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act. ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT (MANU VEDWAN) th ON 29 January, 2014 METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE SPECIAL COURT NO.09, NI ACT DWARKA, DELHI
