DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG096

TITLE: Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma vs . Pawan Kumar Page No. 1/12 on 17 May, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/23001186/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, case, kumar, sharma, pawan, page, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI RAVINDER SINGH­II METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE DWARKA COURTS, NEW DELHI Case No. : 5176/14 Unique Case ID No. : R0534662009 Raj Kumar Sharma S/o Sh. Mali Ram Sharma R/o RZ­672, Street No. 18 E, Sadh Nagar, Palam Colony, New Delhi­110045. .......................................Complainant Versus 1)Pawan Kumar S/o Sh. Jagdish Prasad 2) Jagdish Prasad R/o Radhika Collection, VPO Khatu Shyam Jee, Tehsil Danta Ram Garh, District Sikar, Rajasthan. Also at Sauragya Panchi Devi Memorial Chikatsalya, Manda Chauraha, VPO Khatu Shyam Jee, Tehsil Danta Ram Garh, District Sikar, Rajasthan. .......................................Accused Date of Institution: 25.07.2009 Plea of the accused: Pleaded Not Guilty Date of Reserving Judgment: 25/04/2014 Sentence or final Order: Convicted Date of Judgment: 17/05/2014 JUDGMENT BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE CASE 1. By way of the present judgment, I shall decide the complaint Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 1/12 case U/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (hereinafter Said as NI Act) filed by the complainant Raj Kumar Sharma against the accused persons Pawan Kumar S/o Sh. Jagdish Prasad and Sh. Jagdish Prasad. 2. The factual matrix necessary for disposal of the present case as per the allegations in the complaint are that, the complainant is doing the business of garments and both the accused persons Raj Kumar and Jagdish Prasad are alleged to be the relative of the complainant. It is further alleged that accused No. 1 Pawan Kumar was having business terms with the complainant and due to this he was also having close relations with the complainant. It is further alleged that the accused No. 2 Jagdish Prasad is father of accused No. 1 Pawan Kumar. It is alleged that both the accused No. 1 and 2 due to close relationship with the complainant approached the complainant for grant of a friendly loan. It is alleged that both the accused persons approached the complainant for the said loan in the month of July, 2007 at the business place of the complainant at Delhi. It is alleged that both the accused requested the complainant to given a friendly loan of Rs. 2,50,000/­ as both the accused were in need of money. It is further alleged that both the accused persons assured the complainant that they would return the money. It is further alleged that thereafter the complainant gave a loan of Rs. 2,50,000/­ to both the accused persons by way of cash and it was assured by the accused persons that they would return the said loan amount within a period of one year. It is further alleged that after a months time both the accused persons contacted the complainant and requested that instead of one year they would return the loan amount within two years. It is further alleged that thereafter the accused persons in discharge of their liability towards the said loan amount issued a cheque bearing no. 495126 dated 05.04.2009 amounting to Rs. 2,50,000/­ drawn on State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur, Khatu Shyam Ji branch in favour of the complainant. It is alleged that the accused persons assured the complainant that the cheque will be encashed at the time of presentation. It is further alleged that the complainant had even contacted the accused persons before presentation of the cheque in question and accordingly, the complainant presented the Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 2/12 cheque in question for encashment with its bank i.e. Axis Bank Ltd. and the same was dishonoured vide cheque returning memo dated 26.05.2009 with remarks "Insufficient Funds". Thereafter it is alleged that the complainant came to know about the fact of dishonour of the cheque in question on 16.06.2009. It is further alleged that immediately after knowing of the dishonour of the cheque in question the complainant contacted the accused persons herein and requested them for making the payment but they refused to make the payment. Thereafter the complainant has given a legal notice of demand dated 24.06.2009 to the accused which was sent through speed post and U. P. C. on 24.06.2009 thereby calling upon the accused persons to make the payment of the cheque amount. It is alleged that the accused persons have failed to pay any sum in response to the legal notice of demand as a result of which the complainant has filed the present complaint for prosecution of the accused U/s 138 of the NI Act. 3. After the complaint was filed, the complainant Raj Kumar Sharma led his pre­summoning evidence by way of an affidavit and after hearing the counsel for the complainant and considering the entire material and documents on record, summons were issued against the accused No. 1 only i.e. Pawan Kumar by the court vide order dated 31.07.2009 for the offence U/s 138 of NI Act. Hence the complaint of the complainant remained restricted to accused No. 1 Pawan Kumar. On appearance of the accused Pawan Kumar a separate notice U/s 251 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (hereinafter said as the Code) dated 23.01.2013 was given to the accused to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Thereafter, the matter was listed for complainant's evidence. 4. The complainant Raj Kumar Sharma got himself examined as CW1 and adopted his pre summoning evidence affidavit which is Ex. CW1/A and he also relied on other documents Ex. CW1/1 to Ex. CW1/18. Ex. CW1/1 is the original cheque in question, Ex. CW1/2 is the cheque deposit slip, Ex. CW1/3 is the cheque returning memo, Ex. CW1/4 is the letter forwarding the cheque in question for collection, Ex. CW1/5 is the cheque returning letter, Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 3/12 Ex. CW1/6 is the legal notice of demand dated 24.06.2009, Ex. CW1/7, Ex. CW1/8, Ex. CW1/9 and Ex. CW1/10 are the speed post receipts, Ex. CW1/11 is the UPC vide which the aforesaid demand notice was sent to the accused and Ex. CW1/12 to Ex. CW1/18 are the returned envelopes. The complainant during evidence also tendered his original ledger book as Ex. CW1/19 and the Income Tax Return Ex. CW1/20. Complainant also tendered his account statement dated 14.07.2007 as Ex. CW1/Z. CW­1 was duly cross examined by the Ld. Counsel for the accused and thereafter, the complainant's evidence was closed at request. STATEMENT OF ACCUSED U/S 313 OF THE CODE. 5. Thereafter, the statement of accused was recorded U/s 313 of the Code in which all the incriminating evidence along with exhibited documents were put to the accused Pawan Kumar in which he stated that he has never taken any loan from the complainant and has also never approached the complainant for availing any loan. The accused however admitted that the complainant is his relative and he was having business relationship with him. The accused further submitted that the cheque in question bears his signatures but he denied that he has filled the contents of the same. The accused further stated that the cheque in question was given by him as a security to the complainant in relation to the goods purchased by him. The accused further stated that he is not aware about the dishonour of the cheque in question and further denied the receipt of the legal demand notice. The accused also stated that the ledger statement Ex. CW1/19 and the statement Ex. CW1/Z are false documents. The accused also stated that the complainant has filed this false complaint case against him and has also deposed falsely against him. He further denied that he owe any liability towards the complainant. DEFENCE EVIDENCE. 6. Thereafter the case was fixed for defence evidence. The accused Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 4/12 filed an application U/s 315 of the Code for producing himself as a defence witness. The said application was allowed and the accused deposed as DW1 and stated that he is running the business of readymade garments. The accused also stated that the complainant is also doing the business of readymade garment and he has given the cheque in question as a security to the complainant during the course of the business. It is also stated that he owed certain liability towards the complainant and he has also made payment to the complainant even after filing of present complaint case. The accused also stated that he owes no liability against the cheque in question. The accused also stated that he has not taken any money from the complainant and he has never come to Delhi before filing of the present complaint case. The accused also stated that the complainant used to visit his shop for business purposes. The accused also stated that he has never received the legal demand notice from the complainant against the dishonour of the cheque in question. The accused further stated that the cheque in question bears his signatures but he denied that he has filled the particulars of the same. The accused further stated that he and his father have never visited the house of the complainant and he even does not know where the complainant is residing. DW­1 (accused) was duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the complainant. Thereafter defence evidence was closed at request of the accused and the case was listed for final arguments. FINAL ARGUMENTS 7. Final arguments were addressed on behalf of both the parties. I have heard the arguments of Ld. Counsels for both the parties and have also given my anxious and thoughtful consideration to the same and further I have also perused the entire record of the case file. Before proceeding further it is imperative for me to go through the relevant provisions of law. Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act reads as: "Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc, of funds in the account:Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 5/12 discharge, in while or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. Explanation:For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability. APPRECIATION OF EVIDENCE IN THE LIGHT OF THE INGREDIENTS OF SECTION 138 OF THE NI ACT & THE DEFENCE RAISED BY THE ACCUSED. 8. In the instant case, it is not disputed by the accused that the Cheque in Question Ex. CW1/1 is drawn on the account maintained by him. Further the signature on the cheque in question Ex. CW1/1 is also not disputed by the accused. The presentation, dishonor of the cheque in question and the cheque returning memo has also not disputed by the accused. Therefore, In view of the evidence on record it stands proved that the cheque in question Ex CW1/1 was signed by the accused and the same was drawn on account maintained by him. It also stands proved that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/1 was presented within the period of its validity and the same was dishonoured vide cheque returning Memo Ex. CW1/3 with remarks "Funds Insufficient". 9. Perusal of the entire evidence reveals that two fold defences have been taken by the accused in the present complaint case. Firstly, that he has not been served with any legal demand notice by the complainant Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 6/12 and secondly that he has not taken any loan from the complainant and he has given the blank signed cheque in question Ex. CW1/1 to the complainant during his business dealings with the complainant and not in discharge of his loan liability as alleged by the complainant. 10. Coming to the first line of defence taken by the accused that he has not been served with the legal demand notice from the complainant, it is pertinent to note that complainant Raj Kumar Sharma as CW­1 has specifically stated in his affidavit Ex. CW1/A that he has got issued the legal notice of demand dated 24.06.2009 to the accused which is Ex. CW1/6 and it was sent to the accused on 24.06.2009 itself vide speed Post and UPC, receipts of which are Ex. CW1/7 to Ex. CW1/10 and Ex. CW1/11 respectively. The Complainant has also placed on record the returned envelopes Ex. CW1/12 to Ex. CW1/18. 11. The accused at the time of framing of the notice under section 251 of the Code, in his statement under section 313 of the code and also during his evidence as DW­1 has denied the receipt of the legal demand Ex. CW1/6. Interestingly, during the cross examination of accused as DW­1 the accused admitted that the legal demand notice Ex. CW1/6 bears his correct address which evidences that the legal demand notice was sent on the correct address of the accused. Further, on perusal of the returned envelopes Ex. CW1/12 to Ex. CW/18 it is revealed that all of them have been returned unserved with remarks "refused". It is trite to say that when there is service of notice by post on the correct address which admittedly has taken place in the present case refusal on the part of the accused would amount to proper service. Otherwise, a trickster cheque drawer would avoid receiving the legal demand notice by adopting different strategies and escape from legal consequences of Section 138 of the NI Act. Therefore, there is always a presumption that the legal demand notice has been duly served upon the accused unless some concrete evidence in rebuttal is adduced by the accused to establish that the Legal Demand Notice has not been served upon him. It was for the accused to rebut the presumption about the service of Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 7/12 notice and show that he had no knowledge that the notice was brought to his address or that the address mentioned on the cover was incorrect or that the letter was never tendered or that the postal receipts were incorrect. Except denials and suggestions the accused has not any lead any evidence to corroborate his stand. Therefore its stands proved that the legal demand notice has been served upon the accused. As such non receipt of notice as a defence on part of the accused has no force. 12. Now coming to the second line of defence which has been taken by the accused that he has not taken any loan from the complainant and he has given the blank signed cheque in question Ex. CW1/1 to the complainant during his business dealings with the complainant and not in discharge of his loan liability as alleged by the complainant. 13. It is trite to say that the crux of penal liability under Section 138 of the Act is that the Cheque in question must be issued for the discharge of any legal debt or liability. Existing of legal debt or liability is sine qua non for constituting the offence. Before proceeding further it is imperative for me to take notice of the provisions of Sections 118(a) and 139 of the NI Act which read as under: "118. Presumptions as to negotiable instruments.--Until the contrary is proved, the following presumptions shall be made­ (a) of consideration.--that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration, and that every such instrument when it has been accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for consideration;" "139. Presumption in favour of holder.--It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque, of the nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. 14. The Division bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Krishna Janardhan Bhat v. Dattatraya G. Hegde, (2008) 4 SCC 54, has held that the accused can discharge the burden of presumption U/s 118 and U/s 139 of the NI Act by raising a probable defence on the strength of 'preponderance Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 8/12 of probabilities'. 15. In RANGAPPA Versus SRI MOHAN AIR 2010 SC 1898 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is a settled position that when an accused has to rebut the presumption under Section 139, the standard of proof for doing so is that of 'preponderance of probabilities'. The accused can rely on the materials submitted by the complainant in order to raise such a defence. 16. From the reading of the above said provisions and the judgments the position of law which emerges is that once execution of the promissory note is admitted, the presumption under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act would arise that it is supported by a consideration. Such presumptions are rebuttable. The accused can prove the non­existence of a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the accused discharges the initial onus of proof by showing that the existence of consideration was improbable or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the Complainant who will be obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and upon its failure to prove would disentitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. The burden upon the accused of proving the non­ existence of the consideration can be either direct or by bringing on record the preponderance of probabilities by reference to the circumstances upon which he/she relies. In case, where the accused fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non­existence of the consideration, the complainant would invariably be held entitled to the benefit of presumption arising under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act in his favour. 17. Now coming back to the present complaint case. In the instant case from the perusal of the entire evidence lead by both the parties it is revealed that both the parties have admitted that they are relatives. However the accused has denied that he has taken any loan from the complainant and has also stated that he has given the cheque in question Ex. CW1/1 to the complainant during his business transaction with the complainant and Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 9/12 not in order to discharge his loan liability as alleged by the complainant. To corroborate his stand the accused has examined himself as DW­1 and reiterated the same contentions. The accused has also during cross examination of CW­1 (complainant) has placed on record receipts Ex. Ex. CW1/X (Colly.) and Ex. CW1/Y (Colly.) to show that he was having business dealings with the complainant. Interestingly the complainant in the complaint itself has admitted that he was also having business dealings with the accused. Further the complainant during his cross examination as CW­1 has also admitted that receipts Ex. CW1/X (Colly.) and Ex. CW1/Y (Colly.) placed on record by the accused has been issued by him but the complainant also stated that the loan transactions and the business transactions are altogether different. Further the complainant has also placed on record the statement of account Ex. CW1/Z maintained by him in regular course of business which also establishes that loan was granted to the accused in July, 2007. The complainant has also placed on record his Income Tax Return Ex. CW1/19 to show his solvency and capacity at the time when loan was granted to the accused. Surprisingly, apart from establishing his business relationship with the complainant which has been admitted by the complainant, the accused has not lead any evidence to corroborate his stand. Merely establishing his business relationship with the complainant would not aid the accused in any way as it itself establishes that both the parties are well known to each other and were having regular transactions, and in such proximities loan over and above the business transactions cannot be ruled out. 18. During course of arguments Ld. Counsel for the accused also relied upon the judgment titled as John K Abharam Vs. Simon C. Abraham & Anr. (2014) 2 SCC 236 the said judgment cited by the counsel is also in clear contradiction with the fact of the present complaint case as in the case in hand the complainant has been able to clearly establish when the loan was granted by him to the accused and also that he was having sufficient funds available with him at the time of granting of the loan. Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 10/12 19. It was for the accused to prove the circumstances under which the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 was issued by him by leading cogent evidence so as to discharge and rebut the presumption raised against him by the Statute U/s 139 and 118 (a) of the NI Act and mere simplicitor denying the allegations would not be at his advantage. The entire evidence favours and supports the stand of the complainant. The accused has not brought any material on record and also no cogent explanations or any probable defence which would rebut the shadow of presumption existing in favour of the Complainant. Therefore, this court do not find any force in the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the accused that the accused has succeeded in rebutting the presumption under Section 139 of the Act. From the materials brought on record and evidence lead by the complainant it is sufficient to hold that the accused has taken loan from the complainant and has issued the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 in discharge of his liability 20. Now coming to the issue that except signatures other particulars in the cheque's in question Ex. CW1/1 has not been filled by the accused. It is trite to say that by putting the name and date there is no material alteration on the cheque U/s 87 of the NI Act as there is no rule of banking business that the name of the payee as well as the amount should be written by the drawer himself, as no law provides that in case of cheque the entire body has to be written by the drawer only. Therefore, once the signature on the cheque in question is admitted as has happened in the case in hand the plea that particulars in the cheque in question has not been filled by the drawer is of no consequence unless some cogent evidence has been lead by the accused that he/she has not expressly or impliedly authorized the payee to fill the particulars therein, which is absenting in the present case. (See Ravi Chopra Vs. State and Another, 2008(2) JCC (NI) 169, Delhi, Jaipal Singh Rana Vs. Swaraj Pal 149 (2008) DLT 682,) Therefore, this defence of the accused also holds no ground. Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 11/12 21. Considering the evidence on record, It stands duly proved that the accused has miserably failed to rebut the presumptions U/s 118 (a) and section 139 of the NI Act. Accordingly, In view of the facts, evidence lead by both the parties coupled with my discussion above, I hereby hold that the Complainant has been able to prove and substantiate its allegation against the accused and all the ingredients for the offence under section 138 of the NI Act have been proved against the accused. Accordingly, accused Sh. Pawan Kumar S/o Sh. Jagdish Prasad, is hereby convicted for the offence U/s 138 of NI Act. Copy of this judgment be given to the convict free of cost. This Judgment contains 12 pages and every Page of this judgment has been signed by me. Announced in the open Court (RAVINDER SINGH -II Dated 17.05.2014 MM (NI Act ­07) DWARKA/NEW DELHI. Case No. : 5176/14 Raj Kumar Sharma Vs. Pawan Kumar Page No. 12/12
