DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG120

TITLE: Cr No. 3/14. M/S Caparo Financial ... vs . on 18 March, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/135410036/



DOMAIN: Commercial and Corporate Law

SUBDOMAIN: Business and Corporate Disputes

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, caparo, march, financial, commercial and corporate law

CONTENT:

CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. IN THE COURT OF SH. ASHUTOSH KUMAR : ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE­3 : DWARKA COURTS : DELHI. In the matter of: ­ Criminal Revision No. 3/2014. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Ltd., 101­104, First Floor, Naurang House, K.G. Marg, Nwe Delhi. ... Revisionist. Vs. 1. Mr. Jasjit Singh Sawhney, S/o Sh. A.S. Sawhney, Director M/s Net 4 India Ltd., AB­11, Community Center, Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi­29. 2. Mr. Surya Chadha, Director M/s Net 4 India Ltd., AB­11, Community Center, Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi. New Delhi­110029. ... Respondents.Date of Institution. : 8.1.2014. Arguments Advanced On. : 18.3.2014. Date of Order. : 18.3.2014. Page No. 1. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. 18.3.2014. Present: Sh. Amol Sumrani, AR of revisionist­complainant with ld. counsel Sh. Rohit P. Ranjan. Sh. Sujit Kr. Keshri, ld. counsel for respondent no. 1 (proposed accused no. 3 who was not summoned by the ld. Trial Court, vide impugned order). Sh. Sanjeev Goyal, ld. counsel for respondent no. 2 (proposed accused no. 4 who was also not summoned by the ld. Trial Court, vide impugned order). Heard. Perused. Ld. counsel for revisionist has filed amended memo of parties correctly numbering the respondents. Reply to the revision petition alongwith copies of certain case laws, have been filed on behalf of the respondent no. 2. Copy supplied. Ld. counsel for respondent no. 1 (accused no. 3 before the ld. Trial Court) has stated that he has already addressed arguments and he does not wish to address further arguments on revision petition. Ld. counsel for revisionist­ complainant and ld. counsel for respondent no. 2 (accused no. 4 before the ld. Trial Court) have addressed further arguments on revision petition. Perused the entire record including TCR and Page No. 2. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. judgments relied upon by the ld. counsels for parties carefully. ­ :: ORDER :: ­ 1. The challenge in the present criminal revision petition u/s 397 CrPC, filed by the revisionist­complainant is to the impugned order dated 20.11.2013 of Ms. Swati Katiyar, ld. MM, Dwarka Courts, Delhi, in complaint case no. 5309/14, titled as "M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Others", u/s 138 NI Act, whereby the ld. Trial Court held that no ground is made out for summoning the accused no. 3 (respondent no. 1 herein) and accused no. 4 (respondent no. 2 herein), while issuance summons to accused no. 1 company and accused no. 2. 2. The relevant portion of impugned order of the ld. Trial Court is reproduced as below: ­ "... ... ... From the record, prima facie the offence u/s 138 NI Act is made out against the accused no. 1 and 2 only. Ld. counsel for complainant prays that accused no. 3 and 4 Page No. 3. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. may also be summoned since they are Directors of accused no. 1. Perusal of record shows that accused no. 3 and 4 are not signatories of cheque in question. Thus, in view of decision of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in "Rushi International Vs. State (NCT of Delhi)", 174 (2010) DLT 254, no ground is made out for summoning accused no. 3 and 4. ... ... ..." 3. Vide impugned order, the ld. Trial Court summoned the accused no. 1 company and accused no. 2 Sh. Amarjit Singh Sawhney, who was stated to be the signatory of the cheque in question on behalf of the accused no. 1 company. 4. Ld. counsel for revisionist has submitted that the respondents no. 1 and 2 were not summoned by the ld. Trial Court inspite of the fact that it was specifically mentioned in the complaint that they were the Directors and were actively involved in and had participated in the day to day affairs of the accused no. 1 company and were, therefore, the persons incharge and responsible for the day to day affairs of the accused no. 1 company. He has also submitted that the said Directors (respondents herein) alongwith accused no. 2 had attended the series of Page No. 4. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. meetings held at the office of the revisionist and induced the revisionist and after inducement, executed all necessary documents in favour of the revisionist such as application for availing the loan, corporate loan agreement, deed of guarantee, undertakings etc., for availing a loan of Rs. 2.17 crores from the revisionist and the said loan agreement was signed and executed between the revisionist as a financer and respondents no. 1 and 2 and accused no. 2 as borrower cum guarantors and in discharge of legal liability of the said loan, accused no. 2 on behalf of accused no. 1, had issued the cheque in question for an amount of Rs. 70 lakh with the consented knowledge and approval of accused no. 3 and 4 (respondents no. 1 and 2 herein). He has further submitted that the ld. Trial Court wrongly applied the ratio of the decision of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in case titled as "Rushi International Vs. State (NCT of Delhi)", 174 (2010) DLT 254, in this case, whereas the said judgment is applicable in the case of individual natural person as the drawer of cheque in the said case was a natural person and company was held to be not liable to be summoned u/s 138 NI Act and further that the ld. Trial Court ignored the provision of Section 141 of NI Act Page No. 5. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. by virtue of which the accused no. 3 and 4 before the said Court (who are respondents no. 1 and 2 herein), were vicariously liable for the offence u/s 138 NI Act for the dishonouring of the cheque in question issued on behalf of the accused no. 1 company by the accused no. 2. He has further argued that no defence of the respondents no. 1 and 2 or any documents filed by them can be considered at the stage of summoning and that in view of the categorical averments in the complaint and contents of pre summoning evidence of AR of complainant as CW1 in this regard, the ld. Trial Court ought to have summoned the respondents no. 1 and 2 and, hence, the impugned order is bad in law and facts and may, accordingly, be set aside and the respondents no. 1 and 2 may be summoned for the offence u/s 138 NI Act r/w/s 141 NI Act. He has relied upon the following case laws: ­ (i) K.K. Ahuja Vs. V.K. Vora & Another, MANU/SC/1111/2009. (ii) M.K. Bajoria, Director, Marshall Sons & Company (Mfg.) Ltd. & Others Vs. M/s Lalith Steel Suppliers, MANU/TN/6102/2006 Page No. 6. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. (iii) N. Rangachari Vs. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd., MANU/SC/7316/2007. (iv) S.V. Muzumdar & Others Vs. Gujarat State Fertilizer Company Ltd. & Another, MANU/SC/318/2005. (v) Sunita Taneja & Another Vs. Intec Capital Ltd., Crl. MC No. 2589/13, Crl. MC No. 2590/13 and Crl. MC No. 2591/13. 5. Ld. counsel for respondent no. 1 during the course of arguments has admitted that the said respondent was the Managing Director of the accused no. 1 company at the relevant point of time. 6. Per contra, ld. counsel for respondent no. 2 has stated that the respondent no. 2 was initially an investor based in Mauritius, as mentioned in the certified copy of Article of Association of accused no. 1 filed on record. He has further submitted that it is specifically mentioned in the said Articles of Association that the said respondent will Page No. 7. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. not be responsible for the business of the accused no. 1 company. He has further submitted that the certified copy of Form 32 filed on record, clearly mentions that he is an independent Non­Executive Director. He has further submitted that neither the specific role of respondent no. 2 has been mentioned in the complaint or affidavit of pre summoning evidence nor any other material has been brought on record by the revisionist to show that he was in any way responsible for the day to day affairs and conduct of the business of accused no. 1 company and, hence, the said respondent no. 2 cannot be summoned for the offence u/s 138 NI Act with the aid of Section 141 NI Act. He has relied upon the following case laws: ­ (i) Mohd. Afzal & Others Vs. Noor Nisha Begum & Another, 66 (1997) DLT 372. (ii) Harshendra Kumar D. Vs. Rebatilata Koley & Others, (2011) 3 SCC 351. (iii) Sudeep Jain Vs. M/s ECE Industries Ltd., Crl. MC No. 1821/13 and Crl. MC No. 1822/13. Page No. 8. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. (iv) Madan Singh Vs. Vee Pee International Pvt. Ltd., Crl. MC No. 2071/12. (v) National Small Industries Corporation Ltd. Vs. Harmeet Singh Paintal & Another, (2010) 3 SCC (vi) Hareram Satpathy Vs. Tikaram Agarwala & Others, (1978) 4 SCC 58. (vii) SMS Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Vs. Neeta Bhalla & Another, (2005) 8 SCC 89. (viii) Sushanta J. Sarkar Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2013) 6 AIR Bom R (NOC 270) 75. (ix) Rajiv Thapar & Others Vs. Madan Lal Kapoor, (2013) 3 SCC 330. (x) Anita Malhotra Vs. Apparel Export Promotion Council & Another, (2012) 1 SCC 520. 7. The relevant portion of the complaint of the revisionist­ Page No. 9. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. complainant from para no. 4 to 10 is reproduced below: ­ "4. That the accused no. 2, 3 & 4 being the directors and the authorized signatories of the accused no. 1 are actively involved and participated in the day to day affairs of the accused no. 1 and are therefore the persons in charge and responsible for the day to day affairs of the accused no. 1. 5. That the complainant submits that accused no. 1 through accused no. 2, 3 & 4 have also submitted an application for availing finance facility of Rs. 2,17,00,000/­ (Rupees Two Crores Seventeen Lakhs Only) and further assured and represented to the complainant, inter alia that the accused no. 1 has financial capability to repay the loan amount. 6. That the accused no. 2, 3 & 4 are the Directors­cum­Authorized Signatories of accused no. 1 and are in charge of and wholly responsible, jointly and severally for the day to day affairs of the accused no. 1. 7. That the accused no. 2 to 4 being the Directors and Authorized Signatories of accused no. 1 have actively attended the series of meetings held at the office of the complainant, induced the complainant and after such inducement the accuse no. 2 to 4, signed and executed all necessary documents in the favour of the complainant such as Page No. 10. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. application for availing the loan, corporate loan agreement, deed of guarantee, undertakings, etc. for availing a loan of Rs. 2,17,00,000/­ (Rupees Two Crores Seventeen Lakhs Only). 8. That the accused no. 2 to 4 for and on behalf of accused no. 1 have signed and executed the corporate loan agreement no. CFSL/2012­13/09 dated 18.6.2012, hereinafter referred to as "loan agreement" and secured a loan of Rs. 2,17,00,000/­ (Rupees Two Crores Seventeen Lakhs Only) from the complainant under the aforesaid corporate loan agreement. It is pertinent to mention here that the said loan agreement was signed and executed between the complainant as a financer and the accused no. 2 to 4 as borrower cum guarantors, and the entire loan amount was to be repaid with interest over a period of 12 loan amount was to be repaid with interest over a period of 12 months. Needless to mention that the entire documents including the said personal loan agreement has been signed and executed at the office of the complainant, moreover the cheque for repayment has been handed over to the complainant at its office at New Delhi. 9. That towards the discharge of the legal liability accrued towards the said loan, the accused no. 2 on behalf of accused no. 1 and with the consented knowledge and approval of the accused no. 3 and 4, had issued a cheque bearing no. 995299 dated 6.9.2013 of Rs. Page No. 11. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. 70,00,000/­ for part payment of the said loan amount. 10. That the complainant presented the cheque bearing no. 995299 dated 6.9.2013 of Rs. 70,00,000/­ issued towards the discharge of the legal liability towards the repayment of the said loan for encashment its banker namely Kotak Mahindra Bank, new Delhi, but to the shock and surprise of the complainant the said cheque got dishonoured and returned back unpaid with the remarks "payment stopped by drawer" vide return memo dated 9.9.2013." 8. Since it is the admitted case of the respondent no. 1 that he was the Managing Director of accused no. 1 company at the relevant point of time, therefore, in view of the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court relied upon by the revisionist in the case of "K.K. Ahuja Vs. V.K. Vora & Another", MANU/SC/1111/2009, respondent no. 1, being principal officer of accused no. 1 company, would be prima facie liable u/s 141 (1) NI Act for the offence u/s 138 NI Act regarding dishonouring of the cheque in question issued on behalf of the accused no. 1 company. 9. The bone of contention is regarding summoning of Page No. 12. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. accused no. 4 (respondent no. 2 herein), I find force in the arguments of ld. counsel for respondent no. 2 that the certified copy of Form 32 of the accused no. 1 company placed on record can be considered by this Court in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of "Harshendra Kumar D. Vs. Rebatilata Koley & Others", (2011) 3 SCC 351, wherein para no. 25 it was held as under: ­ "25. In our judgment, the above observations cannot be read to mean that in a criminal case where trial is yet to take place and the matter is at the stage of issuance of summons or taking cognizance, materials relied upon by the accused which are in the nature of public documents or the materials which are beyond suspicion or doubt, in no circumstance, can be looked into by the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482 or for that matter in exercise of revisional jurisdiction under Section 397 of the Code. It is fairly settled now that while exercising inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 or revisional jurisdiction under Section 397 of the Code in a case where complaint is sought to be quashed, it is not proper for the High Court to consider the defence of the accused or embark upon an enquiry in respect of merits of the accusations. However, in an appropriate case, if on the face Page No. 13. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. of the documents ­ which are beyond suspicion or doubt - placed by the accused, the accusations against him cannot stand, it would be travesty of justice if the accused is relegated to trial and he is asked to prove his defence before the trial court. In such a matter, for promotion of justice or to prevent injustice or abuse of process, the High Court may look into the materials which have significant bearing on the matter at prima facie stage." 10. The landmark judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court regarding vicarious liability of a Director of a company for the dishonouring of a cheque issued on behalf of company with the aid of Section 141 NI Act for the offence u/s 138 NI Act is the case of "SMS Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Vs. Neeta Bhalla and Another", (2007) 4 SCC 70, wherein it was held as under: ­ "The requirement of Section 141 is that the person sought to be made liable should be in charge of and responsible for the conduct of the business of the company at the relevant time. This has to be averred as a fact as there is no deemed liability of a Director in such cases." 11. Also, Hon'ble Supreme Court in a recent judgment titled as "A.K. Singhania Vs. Gujarat State Fertilizer Page No. 14. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. Company Ltd. & Another", 2013 XI AD (SC) 1, held that "for making Director of a company liable for being summoned with the aid of Section 141 of NI Act for the offence u/s 138 NI Act, it is sufficient to allege that he was incharge and responsible for the conduct of the business of the company and it is not necessary to allege and prove that said Director had any specific role in respect of the transaction dealing to cheque in question". 12. Thus, in view of the ratio in aforesaid two cases, it is clear that it was necessary for the complainant to allege in the complaint and to say so in its pre summoning evidence that a particular Director was incharge and responsible for the conduct or day to day affairs of the said company and then the said Director can be summoned with the aid of Section 141 NI Act for the offence u/s 138 NI Act. Besides that it was nowhere obligatory for the revisionist to specifically mention the exact role of any Director at initial stage although the said specific role has been mentioned. Further, any such Director, who has been summoned, can take all defence during cross examination of the revisionist­complainant and also in his defence evidence to show that he was not the person incharge or Page No. 15. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. responsible for the conduct of the accused no. 1 company at the relevant time or that he had nothing to do with the accused no. 1 company. 13. The Form 32 of the accused no. 1 company filed on behalf of the respondent no. 2 reveals that in column no. 5, the name of the said Director is mentioned as independent Non­Executive Director. Ld. counsel for revisionist had strongly contended that there is no tick mark mentioned in the square meant for Non­Executive Director and rather a cross has been mentioned and, hence, it cannot be inferred that he was a Non­Executive Director. However, he has submitted that even if for arguments sake it is assumed that he was a Non­Executive Director, still he participated in the entire transaction as mentioned above and also in view of the fact that nowhere in Section 141 NI Act, it is mentioned that a Non­Executive Director, who participated in all the proceedings cannot be made liable for the offence u/s 138 NI Act with the aid of Section 141 NI Act, therefore, he is liable to be summoned. 14. Considering the totality of the facts and circumstances, specially in view of the fact that the role of the respondent Page No. 16. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. no. 2 has been clearly described by the revisionist in execution of various documents relating to loan account in question by him also and pursuant to the same, as per the case of the revisionist, the loan in question was disbursed and the cheque in question was issued which had got dishonoured due to reason "payment stopped by drawer" and also in view of the fact that nowhere it is mentioned in Section 141 NI Act that a Non­Executive Director, who is incharge and responsible for the day to day conduct and affair of the business of the accused no. 1 company and participated in execution of various documents relating to sanction of loan for the accused no. 1 company, cannot be made liable with the aid of Section 141 NI Act for the offence u/s 138 NI Act. Rather any person, even if he was not a Director, but was incharge and responsible to the company for the business of the company when the offence was committed, would be liable to be summoned for the offence u/s 138 NI Act with the aid of Section 141 NI Act. 15. The case law relied upon by the ld. Trial Court was not applicable to the facts of the present case as the same pertained to liability of a company relating to Page No. 17. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. dishonouring of a cheque issued by a natural person in his individual capacity. 16. In view of the above, I am of the considered opinion that the impugned order of the ld. Trial Court has not been correctly passed and the ld. Trial Court has not considered the provision of Section 141 NI Act and the various judicial pronouncements of higher Courts on the said aspect. The judgments relied upon by the ld. counsel for respondent no. 2 does not help his case in any way, in view of the aforesaid discussions and case laws relied upon. 17. Since there is illegality and impropriety in the order of the ld. Trial Court, therefore, the same is, accordingly, set aside. The revision petition is allowed. 18. After setting aside the impugned order of the ld. Trial Court, this Court has stepped into the shoes of the ld. Trial Court. Accordingly, the respondents no. 1 (accused no. 3 before the ld. Trial Court) and respondent no. 2 (accused no. 4 before the ld. Trial Court) are liable to be summoned for the offence u/s 138 r/w/s 141 NI Act before the ld. Trial Court, on filing of PF/RC/copies, by the revisionist-complainant. The ld. Trial Court shall issue the summons to both the respondents on Page No. 18. Contd... ... ... CR No. 3/14. M/s Caparo Financial Solution Vs. Jasjit Singh Sawhney & Another. the NDOH. 19. The revision petition is disposed of, accordingly. 20. A copy of this order alongwith TCR be sent to the ld. Trial Court, for information and further proceedings, as per law, for 26.3.2014 for 2.00 pm. 21. Revisionist is directed to appear before the ld. Trial Court on the given date and time. 22. Revision petition file be consigned to record room. Announced in the open Court on 18.3.2014. (ASHUTOSH KUMAR) ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE­3 : DWARKA COURTS : DELHI Page No. 19. Contd... ... ...
