DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG101

TITLE: Cc No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar vs Ashish Batra Page No. 1 Of Pages13 on 4 February, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/28984532/



DOMAIN: Criminal Law

SUBDOMAIN: Criminal Justice

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, prashant, kumar, ashish, batra, page, pages, february, financial, criminal law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF MS. NEHA PALIWAL METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-03, KKD, EAST, NEW DELHI Complaint No. 858/01/2012 Unique ID No. 02402R059362012 PS.Shakarpur Shri Prashant Kumar, S/o Sh. Bishan Lal, R/o H.No. 60, Gali No.13, Jagatpuri Extension, Delhi - 110093. ......... Complainant. Versus Sh. Ashish Batra, S/o Sh. Ashok Batra, R/o FF-10, Top Floor, Tikona Park, Laxmi Nagar, Delhi - 110092 Also At: 80-A, Ground Floor, Gopal Departmental Store, Near Jain Uniform School, Laxmi Nagar, Delhi - 110092. ......... Accused. COMPLAINT U/s 138 OF THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT Offence complained of : U/s 138 N.I. Act Plea of Accused person : Not guilty Complaint filed on : 27.2.2012 Final Arguments heard & Concluded on : 24.1.2014 Date of decision of the case : 4.2.2014 Final order : Acquittal CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 1 of Pages13 BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE CASE 1. The present case has been instituted on the complaint of the complainant Prashant Kumar, U/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 (as amended up to date) against the accused Ashish Batra. 2. As per the complaint, it is the case of the complainant that he was having very close relations with Sh. Amit Gupta, S/o Late Sh. Ashok Gupta, for the last 5 years and on 1.11.2011, accused came to his house alongwith Amit Gupta and asked for a friendly loan of Rs. 2.5 lacs for one month on interest @ 1% per month. The complainant on assurance of the accused and in presence of Amit Gupta gave Rs. 2.5 lacs to the accused on 1.11.2011 for one month. 3. It is further submitted by the complainant that after one month accused paid interest on the amount to the complainant in the presence of Amit Gupta and prayed for extension of time to repay the loan amount and therefore, the loan amount and time was extended till 31.12.2011. It is further the case of the complainant that on 1.1.2012 accused came to the complainant alongwith Amit Gupta and paid interest for the month of December 2011 on principal amount and on request of the complainant to repay the principal amount the accused handed over one post dated cheque bearing no. 041514 dated 5.1.2012 for a sum of Rs. 2.5 lacs drawn on ICICI Bank in presence of Amit Gupta to the complainant with the assurance that the cheque would be encashed on its presentation. 4. It is the case of the complainant that however, when he presented the said cheque for encashment, it was dishonoured with the remarks "Payment stopped by drawer", vide cheque returning memo dated 7.1.2012 and when he intimated the accused regarding the same, accused flatly refused to pay the said amount. Thereafter, the complainant got issued legal demand notice dated 21.1.2012, dispatched on the same date to the accused, whereby the accused was asked to pay the said cheque amount of Rs. 2.5 lacs within 15 days. It is however submitted by the complainant that in para 6 as well as in concluding para of notice due to CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 2 of Pages13 typographical error the amount was wrongly mentioned as 25 lacs instead of 2.5 lacs. 5. It is the case of the complainant that as accused has not replied to the said notice within the period of 15 days, the present complaint was filed by the complainant against the accused. Thus it is prayed by the complainant that the accused be tried and punished for the offence U/s 138 NI Act. 6. In the present matter the complaint was filed before the court on 27.2.2012. The cognizance of the offence was taken on 28.2.2012 and on the very same date the Ld. Predecessor of this court summoned the accused for the offence U/s 138 NI Act. 7. Thereafter, on 23.5.2012 the accused appeared before the court. He was admitted to court bail on the same date and on that date notice U/s 251 Cr.P.C. for the offence under section 138 NI Act was framed against the accused to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. It was submitted by the accused at the stage of framing notice that he had no contact or dealing with the complainant and had given the cheque in question to Amit Gupta in relation to gambling in which he lost to Amit Gupta. It was further submitted that Amit Gupta had handed over the cheque in question to the complainant without his consent and has got filled the same. 8. As it was submitted by Ld. Counsel for complainant that he has no objection if the opportunity is granted to the accused to cross examine the complainant, Ld. predecessor of this court put the matter straightaway for the purpose of cross examination of complainant and dispensed with the requirement of moving the application U/s 145(2) NI Act. 9. In order to prove his case, the complainant examined himself as CW-1 and tendered his evidence by way of affidavit before the court and relied upon the documents exhibited as Ex. CW-1/1 to Ex. CW-1/5 which are as under:- (a) Ex. CW-1/1 cheque bearing no. 041514 dated 5.1.2012, of Rs. 2,50,000/-. (b) Ex. CW-1/2 Cheque returning memo dated 7.1.2012, of State Bank of India, containing the remarks CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 3 of Pages13 'Payment stopped by drawer' (c) Ex. CW-1/3 Legal Notice dated 21.1.2012. (d) Ex. CW-1/4 Postal receipts CW-1/4 (Colly.) (e) Ex. CW-1/5 Returned envelope with the remarks "unclaimed returned to sender, intimation delivered". 10. As besides complainant no other witness was examined, on the submission of the Ld. counsel for the complainant post summoning evidence was closed, vide order of the Court on 29.10.2013. Thereafter, the matter was fixed for statement of accused and statement of accused U/s 281 Cr.P.C. was recorded before the court on 13.12.2013, wherein the accused stated that he had executed the cheque in question. However, it was a blank signed cheque given to Amit Gupta. It was however further submitted by the accused that he had given two blank signed cheques to Amit Gupta as he had taken a sum of Rs. 20,000/- from him and had already given an amount of Rs. 15,000/- to him. It was further submitted by the accused that he do not know the complainant and the cheques were in the possession of Amit Gupta. It was further submitted that he had received the legal notice. It was further submitted that he had stopped the payment of the cheque as Amit Gupta had threatened him that he would fill an exaggerated amount of Rs. 2.5 lacs each in the cheque and would falsely implicate him in court cases. It was further submitted that Amit Gupta has expired and he does not wish to lead any defence evidence. 11. Thereafter the matter was fixed for final arguments. 12. I have heard the arguments as advanced by the Ld. counsels for the complainant and the accused and have gone through the material placed on record alongwith the evidence adduced by both the parties before the court. 13. Before adverting to the case in hand it is necessary to discuss the law of the land as applicable to the present case in hand. The main ingredients of Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act are as follows:- (a) The accused issued a cheque on an account CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 4 of Pages13 maintained by him with a bank. (b) The said cheque has been issued in discharge of any legal debt or other liability. (c) The cheque has been presented to the bank within the period of six months from the date of the issuance of the cheque or within the period of its validity. (d) When the aforesaid cheque was presented for encashment, the same was returned unpaid/ dishonoured. (e) The Payee of the cheque issued a legal notice of demand within 30 days from the receipt of information by him from the Bank regarding the return of the cheque. (f) The Drawer of the cheque failed to make the payment within 15 days of the receipt of the aforesaid legal notice of demand. 14. If the aforesaid ingredients are satisfied then the drawer of the cheque shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act. 15. In the present case in hand the complainant has proved before the court the existence of a cheque Ex. CW-1/1 which was dishonored vide memo Ex. CW-1/2 and the sending of legal notice Ex. CW-1/3. 16. In the present matter at the stage of framing of notice U/s 251 Cr.P.C. though it was submitted by the accused that he has not received the legal notice, however, at the stage of recording statement of accused, it was submitted by accused that he has received legal notice in the present matter. 17. In the present case in hand at the stage of framing of notice the accused has admitted his signatures on the cheque, however, has denied that he has given the cheque in question to the complainant and has made a specific averment that he had given the cheque in question to one Amit Gupta in relation to gambling as he has lost to Amit Gupta and he does not know the complainant CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 5 of Pages13 and Amit Gupta might have handed over the cheque in question to the complainant and have got filled the same. It was submitted by the accused that the same was done without his consent. 18. In the present matter it is an admitted case of both parties that said Amit Gupta has expired and therefore, he could not appear before the court to testify regarding the present matter. 19. The complainant was cross examined by the counsel for accused at length, wherein it was deposed by the complainant that he is not an income tax payee and has met with accused through one Amit Gupta who was in the same business as that of the complainant. It was further deposed by the complainant that his monthly income is approximately Rs. 10,000/- to Rs. 30,000/- per month depending upon sales. It was further deposed by the complainant that in December 2012 Amit Gupta alongwith accused came to his house and on asking of Amit Gupta he immediately gave Rs. 2.5 lacs to the accused and no written agreement was made between him and the accused. It was further deposed by the complainant that blank cheque was given by the accused to him on that day and the loan was taken for one month. It was further deposed by the complainant that after one month when he requested the accused to repay the loan amount the accused paid him an interest of Rs. 25,00/- in presence of Amit Gupta and assured him that he will pay the prinicpal amount after one month. It was further deposed by the complainant that after the expiry of that month when he again requested the accused to repay the loan amount he asked him to present cheque in bank and therefore he deposited the cheque in February 2013. 20. Section 118 NI Act raises a number of presumptions of consideration, date, time of acceptance, time of transfer and status of holder in due course unless the contrary is proved. The section lays down special rule of evidence applicable to negotiable instruments and presumptions are one of law and the court shall presume that the negotiable instrument which is the cheque in the present case, was made for consideration, was made on the date which it bears and that it was handed over to the complainant by CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 6 of Pages13 the accused in due course. 21. Section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act raises presumption that the holder of the cheque which is the complainant in the present case received the cheque for the discharge in whole or in part of any debt or other liability. 22. However, these presumption U/s 118 and Section 139 NI Act are rebuttable in nature. These presumptions have to be compulsorily raised as soon as the execution of cheque by the accused is admitted or proved by the complainant and thereafter the burden is shifted to accused to prove otherwise. A presumption is not itself evidence, but only makes a prima facie case for a party for whose benefit it exists. 23. In the present case in hand the accused has admitted before the court that the cheque in question bears his signatures though he has disputed the handing over of the cheque to the complainant for discharge of any legally enforceable debt or other liability. Thus in the present case the execution of the cheque is admitted by the accused before the court. As per the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is no legal requirement that the body of the cheque would also be filled by the person who is signing the same and once the signatures are admitted by the drawer, the presumptions come into force. However, these presumptions are rebuttable in nature, but the onus to rebut the same is upon the accused. 24. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Krishna Janardhan Bhatt Vs Dattatraya G. Hegde (2008) 2 Supreme Court Cases (Cri.) 166 has cautioned that the court must be on guard to see that merely on the application of presumption as contemplated U/s 139 of the NI Act, the same may not lead to injustice or mistaken conviction. 25. It was held by Hon'ble Apex Court in the said case that for proving the defence the accused is not required to step into the witness box and need not examine himself. He may discharge his burden on the basis of the material already brought on record as he a constitutional right to maintain silence. Standard of proof on the part of the accused and that of the prosecution in a criminal case is CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 7 of Pages13 different. The prosecution must prove the guilt of accused beyond all reasonable doubts. However, the standard of proof, so as to prove a defence on the part of the accused is preponderance of probabilities whose inference can be drawn not only from the materials brought on record by the parties, but also by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies. It was held that where chances of false implication cannot be ruled out, the background fact and the conduct of the parties together with their legal requirements are required to be taken into consideration. 26. It has been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Catena of judgments that the standard of proof in discharge of the burden in terms of section 139 of the Act being preponderance of probabilities the inference therefore, can be drawn not only from the material brought on record but also from the reference to the circumstances upon which the accused relies upon. Furthermore it is not essential for the accused to get himself examined as witness and he can discharge the burden of proof which has been shifted upon him due to the presumptions even by cross examination of the complainant's witnesses. 27. In the case of Kumar Exports VS Sharma Carpets 2009 II AD (SC) 117 it was held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that to rebut the statutory presumptions the accused may either adduce direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be discharged by him. However, the court need not insist on every case that the accused should disprove the non-existence of consideration and debt by leading direct evidence, because the existence of negative evidence at all times is neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time mere denial of passing of consideration and existence of debt also would not serve the purpose of accused, something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the complainant. It was further held that once the rebutal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court the evidential burden shifts back upon the complainant and thereafter, the presumptions U/s 118 and 139 of CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 8 of Pages13 the Act will not again come to the complainant's rescue. 28. Thus it has been held by Hon'ble Apex Court that Section 139 of the Act is an example of reverse onus clause which has been included for improving the credibility of Negotiable Instruments. However, as the offence U/s 138 is a regulatory offence only, therefore, test of proportionality should guide the construction and interpretation of reverse onus clauses and the accused cannot be expected to discharge an unduly high standard of proof. 29. In view of the above said decisions it can be safely said that the onus upon the accused is only to show a probable defence which is not high as that of beyond reasonable doubt and only the accused has to prove his defence to the extent of preponderance of probabilities in order to shift back the onus upon the complainant to prove his case before the court. 30. In the present case in hand the accused has been able to rebut the presumptions as raised U/s 118 and 139 of NI Act on the following grounds. 31. Firstly, in the present matter it is admitted by the complainant that he is not an Income Tax Payee, neither he has mentioned regarding the loan transaction to any government authority. It was held in the case of Krishna Janardhan Bhatt Vs Dattatraya Hegde Supra as under:- "26. The courts below failed to notice that ordinarily in terms of Section 269-SS of the Income Tax Act, any advance taken by way of any loan of more that Rs. 20,000/- was to be made by way of an account payee cheque only." 32. Secondly, in the present matter it is deposed by the complainant in his cross examination that he immediately gave Rs. 2.5 lacs to the accused on asking of Amit Gupta, despite the fact his monthly income varies from Rs. 10000/- to Rs. 30,000/- and no written agreement was made between the parties with respect to the same. 33. Thirdly, it is deposed by the complainant that at the time of CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 9 of Pages13 taking the loan the accused gave to him blank signed cheque and after two months when he requested the accused to refund the loan amount, the accused asked him to present the cheque in bank. 34. Fourthly, perusal of the body of the cheque reveals that the cheque was signed in one ink and handwriting and was filled with different ink and handwriting. 35. Considering all these four grounds in totality, the accused has succeeded to prove a probable defence in his favour as in the present case the loan transaction is shown to be a friendly loan of Rs. 2.5 lacs which has not been shown in the Income Tax Returns by the complainant as per his own admission, thereby casting a suspicion upon the version of the complainant as a transaction which is bad in one law cannot be said to be good in another. 36. Further more in the present matter the cheque is written in different handwriting and is signed in different handwriting. Section 20 of Negotiable Instruments Act makes such cheque a valid cheque however, the facts and circumstances of each case decide the legality and validity of such cheque as to whether the same was given as security or towards a liability or otherwise. In the present matter, it is admitted by the complainant that the cheque was handed over to him blank by the accused. No written instruction is placed on record by the complainant to show that the accused has authorised him later on to present the cheque in question after filling the same before the bank. 37. Further, it is the case of the complainant that the accused has given him interest on the loan. However, no statement of account in order to show the payment of interest by the accused to the complainant is proved before the court. 38. In the case of M/s Collage Culture VS Apparel Export Promotion Council, 2007 (4) JCC (NI) 388, it was held by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi that a post dated cheque may be issued under two circumstances, one, it may be issued for a debt in presenti but payable in future, second it may be issued for a debt which may become payable in future upon occurrence of a contingent event. The second types of cheque would be by way of CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 10 of Pages13 security. 39. In the case of Vipul Kumar Gupta Vs Vipin Gupta 2012 (4) JCC (NI) 248 it was held by Hon'ble High Court of Delhi as under :- I find myself in agreement with reasoning given by Ld. ACMM that before a person is convicted for having committed an offence under section 138 of the Act, it must be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the cheque in question, which has been made as a basis of prosecuting the respondent/accused, must have been issued by him in the discharge of his liability or a legally recoverable debt. In the facts and circumstances of this case, there is every reason to doubt the version given by the appellant that the cheque was issued in the discharge of a liability or a legally recoverable debt. The reasons for this, are a number of facts which have been enumerated by the Learned ACMM also. Some of them are that non-mentioning by the appellant in his Income Tax Return or the Books of Accounts, the factum of the loan having been given by him because by no measure, an amount of Rs. 9,00,000/- can be said to be a small amount which a person would not reflect in his Books of Accounts or Income Tax Return, in case the same has been lent to a person. The appellant, neither in the complaint nor in his evidence, has mentioned the date, time or the year when the loan was sought or given. The appellant has presented a cheque, which obviously is written with two different inks, as the CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 11 of Pages13 signatures is appearing in one ink, while as the remaining portion, which has been filled up in the cheque, is in a different ink. All these factors prove the defence of the respondent to be plausible to the effect that he had issued these cheques by way of security to the appellant for getting a loan from Prime Minister Rojgar Yojna. The respondent/accused has only to create a doubt in the version of the appellant, while as the appellant has to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt in which in my opinion he has failed miserably." 40. Thus in the said judgment also the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi uphelded the judgment of the trial court on the reasoning that the loan transaction was not shown in either Books of Accounts or Income Tax Returns and the cheque was written in two different inks, signatures in one ink and body in the another. In the present case in hand as well the complainant has failed to show before the court that the loan transaction was shown in the Income Tax Returns, the transaction was not by way of an account payee cheque, the body of the cheque was written with different ink and the cheque was signed with different ink, the complainant has failed to show before the court his capacity to give a loan of Rs. 2.5 lacs to the accused and has further failed to show that any interest was paid by the accused to the complainant by way of any statement of account. 41. Thus in the present case, the accused has been able to rebut the presumptions as laid U/s 118 and 139 of NI Act and the onus has shifted upon the complainant to prove the guilt of the accused beyond the shadow of all reasonable doubts. However, in the present case the complainant after the onus has shifted upon him has failed to prove the guilt of the accused beyond the shadow of all reasonable doubts. 42. In view of the above said discussions and findings the CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 12 of Pages13 accused is acquitted for the offence U/s 138 NI Act. 43. For the purpose of section 437 A Cr.P.C, the previous personal bond and surety bonds of the accused stands extended for the period of next six months. 44. Let file be consigned to record room.Announced in the open Ccourt today i.e.4.2.2014 (NEHA PALIWAL) MM-03(E):KKD:DELHI: It is certified that the judgment contains 13 pages and all pages bear my signatures. (NEHA PALIWAL) MM-03 (E):KKD:DELHI:4.2.2014 CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 13 of Pages13 CC No. 858/01/2012 Prashant Kumar Vs Ashish Batra page no. 14 of Pages13
