DOCUMENT_ID: JUDG137

TITLE: Cc No. 4522/14 M/S G E Capital ... vs . Ismlile Khan Page No. 1/13 on 12 November, 2014

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Judgment

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Delhi District Court

COURT_TYPE: District_And_Tribunals

CASE_TYPE: Financial

SOURCE: OpenNyAI InJudgements Dataset

SOURCE_URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/161484863/



DOMAIN: Civil and Administrative Law

SUBDOMAIN: General Civil Litigation

SOURCE_TYPE: Judicial Decision

SEARCH_KEYWORDS: financial, capital, ismlile, khan, page, november, financial, civil and administrative law

CONTENT:

IN THE COURT OF SHRI RAVINDER SINGH­II METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE DWARKA COURTS, NEW DELHI Case No. : 4522/14 Unique Case ID No. : R0765252009 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. AIFACS Building, 1 Rafi Marg, New Delhi­110001 ..........................................Complainant Versus Sh. Ismile Khan (Proprietor) M/s Sojat Traders Village Dhakri Teh. Sojat, District­ Pali, Pali­306104 ........................................Accused Date of Institution: 16.04.2009 Plea of the accused: Pleaded Not Guilty Date of Reserving Judgment: 20.10.2014 Sentence or final Order: Acquitted Date of Judgment: 12.11.2014 JUDGMENT BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE CASE 1. By way of the present judgment, I shall decide the complaint case U/s 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 (hereinafter Said as NI Act) filed by the complainant M/s G E Capital Transport Financial Services Ltd. through its authorized representative Sh. Atul Bansal against the accused Ismile Khan, Proprietor of Sojat Traders. CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 1/13 PROLOGUE (COMPLAINANT'S VERSION) 2. The factual matrix necessary for disposal of the present case as per the allegations in the complaint are that the accused in order to partially discharge his contractual loan liability/debt arising out of agreement bearing no. TNJODRCVZ00303207 for the purchase of truck has issued the the cheque bearing no. 998667 dated 13.01.2009 amounting to Rs. 1,77,630/­ drawn on ICICI Bank, Jodhpur branch i.e. cheque in question and on presentation of the same it was dishonored on account of "insufficient funds" vide cheque returning memo dated 31.01.2009. It is alleged that thereafter the complainant has given a legal demand notice dated 25.02.2009 to the accused which was sent through post on 28.02.2009 thereby calling upon the accused to make the payment of the cheque amount. It is further alleged that the accused has received the legal demand notice and despite the receipt of the same has failed to pay any sum in response to the legal notice of demand as a result of which the complainant has filed the present complaint for prosecution of the accused U/s 138 of the NI Act. COMPLAINANT'S EVIDENCE 3. Sh. Atul Bansal AR of the complainant has got himself examined as CW­1 and tendered his post summoning evidence affidavit Ex. CW1/1A. CW­1 also relied upon documents Ex. CW1/A to Ex. CW1/G. Ex. CW1/A is the power of attorney in favour of the AR, Ex. CW1/B is the original cheque in question, Ex. CW1/C is the cheque returning memo, Ex. CW1/D is the legal notice of demand notice, Ex. CW1/E is the postal receipt, Ex.CW1/F is the complaint under disposal, Ex.CW1/G is copy of amalgamation order of the complainant passed by Hon'ble Delhi High Court. During recording of evidence CW­1 also tendered the statement of account of the accused­cum­ foreclosure Ex.CW1/H, copy of the sale invoice as Ex.CW1/I. CW­1 was duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused. Thereafter, the complainant's evidence was closed at request. CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 2/13 STATEMENT OF ACCUSED U/S 313 OF THE CODE 4. Thereafter the statement of accused was recorded U/s 313 of the Code in which all the incriminating evidence along with exhibited documents were put to the accused Ismile Khan. The accused stated that the complainant has already forcefully repossessed the truck for which the loan was granted. It is further submitted by the accused that his truck driver intimated him about the forceful possession of the vehicle taken by the complainant. The accused further stated that the cheque in question bears his signature but he has not filled the other particulars therein. It is further submitted by the accused that the cheque in question was given by him to the complainant as security at the time of taking of the loan. The accused further stated that he was not aware about the dishonour of the cheque in question. The accused further admitted that he has received the legal demand notice from the complainant. The accused also stated that the AR of the complainant (CW­1) has falsely deposed about the sale of the vehicle. The accused further stated that the vehicle has never been sold by the complainant vide invoice Ex.CW1/I. The accused further stated that as per his inquiries the vehicle is now registered with someone at Churu, Rajasthan and it is further submitted by the accused that the statement of account Ex. CW1/H is false. The accused further submitted that the complainant has filed a false case against him and the complainant witness have deposed against him falsely. The accused also stated that he owes no liability towards complainant as alleged. The accused further stated that the complainant has wrongfully taken possession of his vehicle and has sold the same for a price much lower than the market value. It is further submitted by the accused that the margin price shown by the complainant is false and fabricated and the present complaint case has been filed by the complainant just to harass him and extort money from him. Altogether the accused denied all his liability towards the complainant. Thereafter the case was fixed for defence evidence CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 3/13 DEFENCE EVIDENCE. 5. Accused examined himself as a defence witness i.e. DW­1. DW­1 was duly cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the complainant. Thereafter defence evidence was closed at request of the accused and the case was listed for final arguments. FINAL ARGUMENTS 6. Final arguments were addressed on behalf of both the parties. I have heard Ld. Counsels for both the parties and have also perused the entire record of the case file. Before proceeding further it is imperative for me to go through the relevant provisions of law. Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act provides that: "Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc, of funds in the account:Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in while or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier; (b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 4/13 Explanation:For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other liability. APPRECIATION OF EVIDENCE IN THE LIGHT OF THE INGREDIENTS OF SECTION 138 OF THE NI ACT AND THE DEFENCE RAISED BY THE ACCUSED 7. It is not disputed by the accused that the cheque's in Question Ex. CW1/B is drawn on the account maintained by him in the name of his firm Sojat Traders. Further signature on the cheque in question has also not been disputed by the accused. Further the presentation, dishonor of the cheque in question and the cheque returning memo has also not been challenged by the accused. Therefore in view of the evidence on record it stands proved that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/B is signed by the accused and the same is drawn on account maintained by him in the name of his firm Sojat Traders. Further it also stands duly proved that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/B was dishonored vide cheque returning memo Ex. CW1/C dated 31.01.2009 with the reason "Funds Insufficient" 8. From the perusal of the entire evidence it has come to fore that two fold defence has been taken by the accused. Firstly, that he has not been served with the legal demand notice by the complainant. And secondly that the blank signed cheque in question Ex. CW1/B has been given by him to the complainant as security at the time of taking of the loan. 9. Coming to the first line of defence taken by the accused that he has not been served with the legal demand notice Ex. CW1/D by the complainant. It is pertinent to note that CW­1 (AR) of the complainant has examined himself as CW­1 and has specifically stated in his evidence affidavit Ex. CW1/1 that the complainant has got issued the legal demand notice Ex. CW1/D to the accused. CW­1 has also placed on record the registered post receipt Ex.CW1/E on record. The accused has denied the receipt of the legal demand notice at the CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 5/13 time of framing of notice U/s 251 of the Code. Further a suggestion regarding non receipt of the legal demand notice was also put to CW­1(AR) by the counsel for the accused which was denied by the witness. Interestingly in his Statement U/s 313 of the Code the accused has admitted the receipt of the legal demand notice. Further, on perusal of the legal demand notice, it is revealed that the same has been sent to the accused at Village Dhakri, Teh. Sojat, Distt. Pali, Pali­306104. The same address of the accused have been furnished by the complainant on the complaint Ex. CW1/F. The accused throughout the trial has not disputed the address mentioned in the legal demand notice and the complaint and same address has been furnished by the accused on his bail bond. Therefore, it is evident that legal demand notice has been sent at the correct address of the accused. Further, the postal receipt Ex. CW1/E vide which the legal demand notice has been sent to the accused is also on record. It is trite to say that when there is service of notice by post on the correct address which evidently has taken place in the present case, there is always a presumption that the legal demand notice has been duly served upon the accused unless some concrete evidence in rebuttal is adduced by the accused to establish that the legal demand notice has not been served upon him. It was for the accused to rebut the presumption about the service of notice and show that the legal demand notice Ex. CW1/D was never tendered or that the postal receipt Ex.CW1/E is incorrect or the address mentioned on the legal demand notice is incorrect. Except denials and suggestions the accused has not any lead any evidence to corroborate his stand. Therefore its stands proved that the legal demand notice Ex.CW1/D has been served upon the accused. As such non receipt of the legal demand notice as a defence on part of the accused has no force. 10. Coming to the second line of defence taken by the accused that he has not issued the cheque in question Ex. CW1/B to the complainant in partial discharge of his loan liability and the same was given by him as security in blank signed manner at the time taking of CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 6/13 the loan. 11. Taking up the first limb of the defence i.e except signatures no other particular in the Cheque in question Ex. CW1/B has been filled by the accused. It is not disputed by the accused that the Cheque in Question Ex. CW1/B is drawn on the account maintained by him. Further signature on the cheque in question Ex. CW1/B has also not been disputed by the accused. However, it is also submitted by the accused that the cheque in question Ex. CW1/B was given by him to the complainant as a security and except signatures no other particulars in the Cheque in Question Ex. CW1/B has been filled by him. During the course of arguments Ld. Counsel for the accused also reiterated the same contentions. Surprisingly except denials and suggestions accused has not brought any evidence on record to support his stand that except signatures he has not filled the other particulars in the cheque in question. Furthermore even believing the stand of accused to be correct still there is also no evidence on record to show that he has not even authorized the complainant to fill the said particulars. More so it is trite to say that by putting the name and date there is no material alteration on the cheque U/s 87 of the NI Act as there is no rule of banking business that the name of the payee as well as the amount should be written by the drawer himself, as no law provides that in case of cheque the entire body has to be written by the drawer only. Therefore, once the signature on the cheque in question is admitted as has happened in the case in hand, the plea that particulars in the cheque in question has not been filled by the drawer is of no consequence unless some cogent evidence has been lead by the accused that he has not expressly or impliedly authorized the payee to fill the particulars therein. 12. Before I advert to the second limb of the defence taken by the accused i.e. the cheque in question Ex. CW1/B has been issued by him as a security to the complainant and not in discharge of his part liability towards the complainant, it is imperative for me to go through CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 7/13 the provisions of Sections 118(a) and 139 of the NI Act which read as under: "118. Presumptions as to negotiable instru­ ments.--Until the contrary is proved, the fol­ lowing presumptions shall be made­ (a) of consideration.--that every negotiable in­ strument was made or drawn for consideration, and that every such instrument when it has been accepted, indorsed, negotiated or trans­ ferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for consideration;" "139. Presumption in favour of holder.--It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque, of the nature referred to in Section 138 for the dis­ charge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. 13. The Division bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Krishna Janardhan Bhat v. Dattatraya G. Hegde, (2008) 4 SCC 54, has held that the accused can discharge the burden of presumption U/s 118 and U/s 139 of the NI Act by raising a probable defence on the strength of preponderance of probabilities. The relevant portion of the said judg­ ment is reproduced here under (Paras 32 & 34): "32. An accused for discharging the burden of proof placed upon him under a statute need not examine himself. He may discharge his burden on the basis of the materials already brought on record. An accused has a constitutional right to maintain silence. Standard of proof on the part of the accused and that of the prosecution in a criminal case is different. 34. Furthermore, whereas prosecution must prove the guilt of an accused beyond all reasonable doubt, the standard of proof so as to prove a defence on the part of the accused is 'preponderance of probabilities'. Inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only from the materials brought on record by the parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon which he relies." 14. In Rangappa Vs Sri Mohan AIR 2010 SC 1898 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is a settled position that when an ac­ cused has to rebut the presumption under Section 139 of the NI Act, CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 8/13 the standard of proof for doing so is that of `preponderance of proba­ bilities' and if the accused is able to raise a probable defence which cre­ ates doubts about the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution can fail and for this the accused can rely on the materi­ als submitted by the complainant in order to raise such a defence and it is conceivable that in some cases the accused may not need to ad­ duce evidence of his/her own. 15. From the reading of the above said provisions and the judg­ ments the position of law which emerges is that once execution of the promissory note is admitted as has happened in the instant case, the presumption under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act would arise that it is supported by a consideration. Such a presumption is re­ buttable. The accused can prove the non­existence of a consideration by raising a probable defence. If the accused discharges the initial onus of proof showing that the existence of consideration was improb­ able or doubtful or the same was illegal, the onus would shift to the Complainant who will be obliged to prove it as a matter of fact and upon its failure to prove would disentitle him to the grant of relief on the basis of the negotiable instrument. The burden upon the accused of proving the non­existence of the consideration can be either direct or by bringing on record the preponderance of probabilities by refer­ ence to the circumstances upon which he relies. In case, where the ac­ cused fails to discharge the initial onus of proof by showing the non­ existence of the consideration, the complainant would invariably be held entitled to the benefit of presumption arising under Section 118(a) and Section 139 of the NI Act in his favour. 16. Coming back to the instant case. In the case in hand, it has been admitted by the accused that he has taken loan from the complainant for the purchase of the truck vide loan agreement no. TNJODRCVZ00303207 but throughout the trial the accused has denied the claim of the complainant and has stated that the vehicle has been repossessed by the complainant and the cheque in question Ex. CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 9/13 CW1/B has not been given by him to the complainant in part discharge of his liability and the same has been given by him as a security to the complainant at the time of taking of the loan. To corroborate his stand the accused has also examined himself as DW­1. It is interesting to see that CW­1 has placed the statement of account of the accused Ex. CW1/H on record bearing legacy Id number TNJODRCVZ00303207 and during his cross examination, the witness was confronted with another statement of account Ex.CW1/X. Interestingly, CW­1 has admitted in his cross examination that the statement of account Ex. CW1/X belongs to the complainant. Perusal of statement of statement of account Ex. CW1/X reveals that the same pertains to the loan account of the accused having same legacy Id number TNJODRCVZ00303207. Therefore from the own record and admission of the witness (CW­1) it stands established that statement of account Ex. CW1/H & Ex. CW1/X both pertains to the loan account of the accused. The statement of account Ex.CW1/H filed by CW­1 only mentions the payments made by the accused and do not specify the mode in which the payment were made by the accused. Perusal of the statement of account Ex.CW1/X reveals that post dated cheques were presented by the complainant for clearance of the installments payable by the accused and on 01.06.2007 the first payment of installment was cleared in the loan account of the accused by a cheque bearing no. 998670 and subsequent payments were also cleared in the said account using the cheques of the same series till May, 2008 i.e. from cheque bearing No. 998670 to 998681. Further perusal of statement of account Ex. CW1/X also reveals that the payment for the month of July 2007 was bounced and the same was cleared by the accused through another cheque of the same series i.e 998687. Interestingly, the cheque in question Ex. CW1/B bears the no. 998667 i.e. prior in series to the cheques given for payment of the installments thereby making the stand of the accused highly probable that the cheque in question Ex.CW1/B was given by him to the complainant as a security at the time of taking of the loan. Further this payment made by the accused through subsequent cheques of the CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 10/13 same series i.e. from cheque bearing No. 998670 to 998681 also make it highly inconceivable that a person would keep a previous single cheque leaf of the same series of which he has already given post dated cheques for the payment of his monthly EMI's and further would hand over the same to the complainant after one and a half years of the commencement of the loan. 17. During course of arguments, the ld. Counsel for the accused also argued that the vehicle for which the loan was taken by the accused was repossessed by the complainant and subsequently the cheque in question Ex.CW1/B has been presented for clearance. It is pertinent to note that during cross examination of CW­1 inventory of the vehicle Ex.CW1/X1 dated 06.01.2009 was put to the witness which has been denied by the witness stating that the same do not possess the seal of the complainant. Interestingly, the witness CW­1 has not disputed the repossession of the vehicle but has stated that the same was repossessed by the complainant in February, 2009 and not in January, 2009 as indicated from the inventory sheet Ex. CW1/X1. It is surprising to see that the complainant throughout the trial has not placed on record any document to show as to when the repossession of the vehicle was carried out by the complainant. Except denial of the inventory sheet Ex.CW1/X1 the complainant has not lead any evidence to show as to when the vehicle was repossessed by the complainant. Therefore, there is no reason to disbelieve the inventory sheet Ex.CW1/X1 whereby the vehicle was repossessed by the complainant in January 2009. Therefore, I have no hesitation in holding that the vehicle was repossessed by the complainant vide inventory sheet Ex.CW1/X1 dated 06.01.2009. Now, what needs to be seen is, whether the cheque in question Ex.CW1/B is dated prior to the repossession of the vehicle or is dated subsequent to the repossession of the vehicle. Perusal of the cheque in question Ex.CW1/B reveals that the same is dated 13.01.2009 and was dishonoured vide cheque returning memo dated 29.01.2009, thereby making it clear that the cheque in question Ex.CW1/3 is dated subsequent to the repossession CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 11/13 of the vehicle on 06.01.2009. It is trite to say that in hirer purchase agreement between the financial institution and the hirer the agreement executed stands determined by the act of repossessing of the vehicle by the financial institution and the cheque given would be instrument without consideration. The very fact that the complainant has repossessed the vehicle from the complainant on 06.01.2009 and has also admittedly sold it off subsequently shows that there was no occasion for the complainant to present the cheque in question Ex.CW1/B as by repossessing the vehicle the complainant has exhausted one of its remedy which might have been available to the complainant under the agreement. 18. In a case of this nature, where the chances of false implication cannot be ruled out, the background fact and the conduct of the parties together with their legal requirements are required to be taken into consideration. All the aforesaid circumstances/factors rebut the presumptions arising in favour of the complainant provided under Section 139 of the NI Act because they raise credible doubt over the veracity of the complainant's claims and satisfy the test of rebuttal on the strength of preponderance of probabilities thereby weakening the claim of the Complainant. 19. In light of my discussion above I hereby hold that the accused has been able to raise probabilities and has been able to rebut the presumptions which were raised against him. The defence raised by the accused is sufficient to discharge the initial burden of proof raised on him. This court do not find any force in the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the Complainant that the accused has failed to rebut the presumption under Section 139 of the NI Act. It is trite to say that presumptions are not in itself evidence but it only enables a party in whose favour it exists to show that he has a prima facie case. In the case in hand the presumptions under Section 139 of NI Act alone cannot be the sole basis to prove the case of the complainant. The materials and evidence available on the record do CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 12/13 not bridge the gap. It is highly improbable that the accused has given the cheque in question Ex CW1/B in order to discharge his part liability. Therefore, I hereby hold that the Complainant has not been able to prove and substantiate the allegations that the cheque in question Ex CW1/B was issued by the accused in part discharge of his legal liability. Furthermore, mere non payment of cheque amount within 15 days of receipt of legal notice is not itself sufficient to fasten any liability U/s 138 of the NI Act as it is established that the Cheque in Question Ex. CW1/B was not issued by the accused in discharge of his part legal liability. 20. Accordingly, I hold that complainant has not been able prove all the ingredients of the offence U/s 138 of NI Act against the accused. Accordingly, accused Ismile Khan Proprietor of Sojat Traders is hereby acquitted of the offence U/s 138 of NI Act. This Judgment contains 13 pages and every Page of this judgment has been signed by me. Announced in the open Court (RAVINDER SINGH ­II) Dated 12.11.2014 MM (NI Act ­07) Dwarka/New Delhi CC No. 4522/14 M/s G E Capital Transportation Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Ismlile Khan Page no. 13/13
