DOCUMENT_ID: ACT007

TITLE: Actuaries Act, 2006

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Act

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Parliament of India

SOURCE: Indian-Laws Dataset

DESCRIPTION:
Indian legislation containing 25 legal sections.






DOMAIN: Administrative and Regulatory Law

SUBDOMAIN: Government Regulation

SOURCE_TYPE: Legislative Legal Text

KEYWORDS: actuaries, administrative and regulatory law, government regulation

CONTENT:

SECTION: 1

The Actuaries Act, 2006 Chapter I Preliminary 1. Short title, extent and commencement - 1. This Act may be called the Actuaries Act, 2006. 2. It extends to the whole of India. 3. It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of that provision.

SECTION: 10

The Actuaries Act, 2006 10. Members to be known as Actuaries. - Every member of the Institute in practice shall, and any other member may, use the designation of an Actuary and no member using such designation shall use any other description whether in addition thereto or in substitution there for: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any such member from adding any other description or letters to his name, if entitled thereto, to indicate membership of such other Institute, whether in India or elsewhere, as may be recognised in this behalf by the Council, or any other qualification that he may possess, or to prohibit a firm, all the partners of which are members of the Institute and in practice, from being known by its firm name as Actuaries.

SECTION: 11

The Actuaries Act, 2006 11. Disqualifications. - Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6, a person shall not be entitled to have his name entered in, or borne on, the register if he- a. has not attained the age of twenty-one years at the time of his application for the entry of his name in the register; or b. is of unsound mind and stands so adjudged by a competent court; or c. is an undischarged insolvent; or d. being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained from the court a certificate stating that his insolvency was caused by misfortune and without any misconduct on his part; or e. has been convicted by a competent court whether within or outside India, of an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with imprisonment or of an offence, not of a technical nature, committed by him in his professional capacity unless in respect of the offence committed he has either been granted a pardon or, on an application made by him in this behalf, the Central Government has, by an order in writing, removed the disqualification; or f. has been removed from the membership of the Institute on being found on inquiry to have been guilty of a professional or other misconduct: Provided that a person who has been removed from the membership for a specified period shall not be entitled to have his name entered in the Register until the expiry of such period.

SECTION: 12

The Actuaries Act, 2006 12. Composition of Council of Institute. -. 1. There shall be a Council of the Institute for the management of the affairs of the Institute and for discharging the functions assigned to it by or under this Act. 2. The Council shall be composed of the following persons, namely:- a. a minimum of nine and not more than twelve persons from amongst fellow members to be elected by the fellow and the associate members of the Institute in such manner as may be prescribed: Provided that a fellow of the Institute, who has been found guilty of any professional or other misconduct and whose name is removed from the Register or has been awarded penalty of fine, shall not be eligible to contest election,- i. in case of misconduct falling under the Schedule of this Act [except Part IV(B)], for a period of three years; or ii. in case of misconduct falling under Part IV(B) of the Schedule of this Act, for a period of six years, after the completion of the period of removal of name of the fellow from the Register or the payment of fine is made, as the case may be; and a. b. i. an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to be nominated by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of Finance; ii. one person from the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority constituted under the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 nominated by the Central Government; and iii. not more than two persons having knowledge in the field of life insurance, general insurance, finance, economics, law, accountancy or any other discipline which in the opinion of the Central Government, would be useful to the Council, to be nominated in such manner as may be prescribed: Provided that till such time as the Council is constituted under this Act, the Executive Committee of the Actuarial Society shall discharge all the functions and shall have all the powers of the Council. 1. 2. 3. No person holding a post under the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be, shall be eligible for election to the Council under clause (a) of sub-section (2). 4. One-third of the members of the Council referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration of every second year by rotation but shall be eligible for re-election. 5. Any person nominated under clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall hold office for a period of six years from the date of his nomination unless he is removed earlier by the Central Government and shall be eligible for re-nomination: Provided that he shall be given an opportunity of being heard before such removal.

SECTION: 13

The Actuaries Act, 2006 13. Annual general meetings. - The Council shall every year hold an annual general meeting of the Institute to elect its members under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 12, or to discuss any matter which it deems fit, and not more than fifteen months shall elapse between the date of one annual general meeting of the Institute and that of the next: Provided that from the appointed day the Institute may hold its first annual general meeting within a period of not more than eighteen months and if such general meeting is held within that period, it shall not be necessary for the Institute to hold any general meeting in that year: Provided further that the Central Government may, for sufficient reasons, extend the time within which any general meeting shall be held.

SECTION: 14

The Actuaries Act, 2006 14. Re-election to Council. - 1. Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a member of the Council elected under clause (a) of sub- section (2) of section 12 shall be eligible for re-election but not for more than two consecutive terms. 2. A member of the Council, who is or has been elected, as the President under sub-section (1) of section 17, shall not be eligible for election or nomination as a member of the Council.

SECTION: 15

The Actuaries Act, 2006 15. Settlement of disputes regarding election. - In case of any dispute regarding any election under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 12, the aggrieved person may make an application within thirty days from the date of the declaration of the result of the election to the Council which shall forward the same forthwith to the Central Government.

SECTION: 16

The Actuaries Act, 2006 16. Establishment of Tribunal. - 1. On receipt of any application under section 15, the Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Tribunal consisting of a Presiding Officer and two other Members to decide such dispute and the decision of such Tribunal shall be final. 2. A person shall not be qualified for appointment,- a. as a Presiding Officer of the Tribunal unless he has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of the service for at least three years; b. as a Member unless he has been a member of the Council for at least one full term and who is not a sitting Member of the Council or who has not been a candidate in the election under dispute; and c. as a Member unless he holds the post of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India or any other post under the Central Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India. 1. 2. 3. The terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer and Members of the Tribunal, their place of meetings, remuneration and allowances shall be such as may be prescribed. 4. The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Council.

SECTION: 17

The Actuaries Act, 2006 17. President, Vice-President and Honorary Secretary. - 1. The Council shall, at its first meeting, elect three of its members from amongst persons referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 12, to be respectively the President, Vice-President and Honorary Secretary thereof, and as often as the office of the President, Vice-President and Honorary Secretary falls vacant, the Council shall choose one of the member in the same manner: Provided that the Chairperson of the Council of the Actuarial Society shall continue to hold such office as President after the commencement of this Act, until such time as a President is elected under the provisions of this sub-section. 2. The President shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Council. 3. The President, the Vice-President or the Honorary Secretary shall hold office for a period of two years from the date on which he is chosen provided that he continues to be a member of the Council. 4. The President and the Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office. 5. In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the President, the Vice-President shall act as the President until a new President is elected in accordance with the provisions of this section to fill such vacancy and enters upon his office. 6. When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President shall discharge his functions until the President resumes his duties.

SECTION: 18

The Actuaries Act, 2006 18. Resignation from membership and filling up of casual vacancies. - 1. Any member of the Council may at any time resign his membership by writing under his hand addressed to the President, and the seat of such member shall become vacant when such resignation is accepted and notified by the Council. 2. A member of the Council, other than a member nominated under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 12 shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is declared by the Council to have been absent without sufficient reason from three consecutive meetings of the Council, or of any of the Committees constituted by the Council, and of which he is a member or he has been found guilty of any professional or other misconduct and awarded penalty of fine or if his name is, for any cause, removed from the register under the provisions of sections 24 and 30. 3. A casual vacancy in the office of a member of the Council shall be filled by fresh election or by nomination by the Central Government, as the case may be, and the person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the member in whose place he was elected or nominated would have held that office: Provided that no election shall be held to fill a casual vacancy occurring within one year prior to the date of the expiration of the term of such member. 4. No act done by the Council shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of the Council.

SECTION: 19

The Actuaries Act, 2006 19. Functions of Council. - 1. The duty of carrying out the functions under the provisions of this Act shall be vested in the Council. 2. In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the functions of the Council shall include- a. the holding of examination of the candidates for enrolment and specifying fees there for; b. the specifying of qualifications for entry in the register; c. the recognition of foreign qualifications and training for the purposes of enrolment;(d) the granting of or refusal to grant the certificate of practice under this Act; d. the maintenance and publication of a register of persons qualified to practice as Actuaries; e. the levy and collection of fees from members, students, examinees and other persons; f. the removal of names from the register and the restoration to the register of names which have been removed; g. the regulation and maintenance of the status and standard of professional qualifications of members of the Institute; h. to issue guidelines for the observance of the members, including the student members; i. to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Central or State Governments and to receive bequests, donations and transfer of movable or immovable properties from testators, donors or transferors, as the case may be; j. co-operating with educational or other institutions in any part of the world having objects wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of members and generally in such manner as may be conducive to achievement of their common objects; k. instituting and awarding fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals; l. giving gifts, grants, donations or benefactions to other institutions or bodies having objects similar to those of the Institute; m. the carrying out, by granting financial assistance to persons other than members of the Council, or in any other manner, of research in the actuarial science; n. the maintenance of a library and publication of books, journals and periodicals relating to actuarial science; o. the exercise of disciplinary powers conferred by this Act; p. establishing such regional council or councils as may be decided from time to time and fixing their headquarters; and(r) doing all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the Institute.

SECTION: 2

The Actuaries Act, 2006 2. Definitions. - 1. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- a. "Actuary" means a person skilled in determining the present effects of future contingent events or in finance modelling and risk analysis in different areas of insurance, or calculating the value of life interests and insurance risks, or designing and pricing of policies, working out the benefits, recommending rates relating to insurance business, annuities, insurance and pension rates on the basis of empirically based tables and includes a statistician engaged in such technology, taxation, employees' benefits and such other risk management and investments and who is a fellow member of the Institute; and the expression "actuarial science" shall be construed accordingly; b. "Actuarial Society" means the Actuarial Society of India registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950; c. "appointed day" means the date on which the Institute is constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3; d. "Authority" means the Appellate Authority referred to in section 32; e. "Board" means the Quality Review Board constituted under sub-section (1) of section 43; f. "Council" means the Council of the Institute as referred to in section 12; g. "fellow" means a fellow member of the Institute; h. "Institute" means the Institute of Actuaries of India constituted under section 3; i. "member" means an individual whose name appears in the register of members maintained by the Institute; j. "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;(k) "President" means the President of the Council; k. "register" means the register of members maintained by the Institute under this Act; l. "specified" means specified by regulations made under this Act; m. "Tribunal" means a Tribunal established under sub-section (1) of section 16; n. ''Vice-President'' means the Vice-President of the Council; o. "year" means the period commencing on the 1st day of April of any year and ending on the 31st day of March of the succeeding year. 1. 2. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a member of the Institute shall be deemed "to be in practice" when individually or in partnership with Actuaries in practice as a member or an employee of a company, he, whether or not in consideration of remuneration received or to be received,- i. engages himself in actuarial profession; or ii. offers to perform or performs services involving the application of actuarial techniques in the fields of insurance, pension, investment, finance and management; or iii. renders such other services as, in the opinion of the Council, are or may be rendered by an actuary in practice; or iv. is in employment of a person engaged in one or more of the activities mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) above, and the words "to be in practice" with their grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly. Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "company" includes a public financial institution as defined in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956.

SECTION: 20

The Actuaries Act, 2006 20. Staff, remuneration and allowances. - 1. For the efficient performance of its functions, the Council may- a. appoint an Executive Director, a Treasurer and such other officers and employees as it deems necessary and fix their salaries, fees, allowances and other conditions of service; and b. fix the allowances of the President, the Vice-President, the Honorary Secretary and other members of the Council and its Committees, in such manner as may be specified. 1. 2. The Executive Director of the Council shall be entitled to participate in the meetings of the Council but shall not be entitled to vote thereat.

SECTION: 21

The Actuaries Act, 2006 21. Committees of Council. - 1. The Council may constitute such committees from amongst its members, and co-opt therein persons who are not members of the Institute, as it deems necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act: Provided that the number of co-opted members shall not exceed one-third of the total membership of the committee. 2. Every committee constituted under this section shall elect its own Chairman: Provided that- i. where the President is a member of such committee, he shall be the Chairman of such committee, and in his absence, the Vice-President, if he is a member of such committee, shall be its Chairman; and ii. where the President is not a member of such committee but the Vice-President is a member, he shall be its Chairman. 1. 2. 3. The committees shall exercise such functions and be subject to such conditions as may be specified.

SECTION: 22

The Actuaries Act, 2006 22. Finances of Council. - 1. There shall be established a fund under the management and control of the Council into which shall be paid all moneys (including donations and grants) received by the Council and out of which shall be met all expenses and liabilities incurred by the Council. 2. The Council may invest any money for the time being standing to the credit of the fund in any security as it may deem prudent consistent with the considerations of security of such investments and maximum returns thereon. Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "securities" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, as amended from time to time. 3. The Council shall keep proper accounts of the fund distinguishing capital account from revenue account. 4. The annual accounts of the Institute shall be subject to audit by a Chartered Accountant in practice within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 to be appointed annually by the Council: Provided that no member of the Council who is a Chartered Accountant or a person who is in partnership with such member shall be eligible for appointment as an auditor under this sub-section. 5. As soon as may be practicable at the end of each year, but not later than the 30th day of September of the year next following, the Council shall cause to be published in the Gazette of India, a copy of the audited accounts and the report of the Council for that year and copies of the said accounts and report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and to all the members of the Institute. 6. The Council may borrow from a scheduled bank, as defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, or from any public financial institution- a. any money required for meeting its liabilities on capital account on the security of the fund or on the security of any other asset, for the time being belonging to it ; or b. for the purpose of meeting current liabilities, pending the receipt of income, by way of temporary loan or overdraft. Explanation.-The expression "public financial institution" means a financial institution specified in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956.

SECTION: 23

The Actuaries Act, 2006 Chapter III Register of Members 23. Register. - 1. The Council shall maintain in the specified manner a register of the members of the Institute. 2. The register shall include the following particulars about every member of the Institute, namely:- a. his full name, date of birth, domicile, residential and professional addresses; b. the date on which his name is entered in the register; c. his qualifications; d. whether he holds a certificate of practice; and e. any other particulars which may be specified. 1. 2. 3. The Council shall cause to be published in such manner as may be specified a list of members as on the 1st day of April each year, and shall, if requested to do so by any such member, send him a copy of such list, on payment of such amount as may be specified. 4. Every member of the Institute shall, on his name being entered in the register, pay such annual membership fee as may be specified by the Council.

SECTION: 24

The Actuaries Act, 2006 24. Removal of name from Register. - The Council may, by order, remove from the register the name of any member of the Institute- a. who is dead; or b. from whom a request has been received to that effect; or c. who has not paid any specified fee required to be paid by him; or d. who is found to have been subject to, at the time when his name was entered in the register, or who at any time thereafter has become subject to, any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 11; or e. who for any other reason has ceased to be entitled to have his name borne on the register.

SECTION: 25

The Actuaries Act, 2006 25. Re-entry in register. - The Council may re-enter the name of a member whose name has been removed from the register for reasons mentioned in clauses (b), (c), (d) and (e) of section 24, by an order, and on paying such fees, and after satisfying such conditions and requirements as may be specified.

SECTION: 26

The Actuaries Act, 2006 Chapter IV Misconduct 26. Disciplinary Committee. - 1. The Council shall constitute a Disciplinary Committee consisting of the President or the Vice-President of the Council as the Presiding Officer and two members of the Council elected by the Council and two members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the persons of eminence having experience in the field of law, education, economics, business, finance, accountancy or public administration: Provided that the Council may constitute more regional Disciplinary Committees as and when it deems fit. 2. The Disciplinary Committee in making the inquiry under the provisions of this Act shall follow such procedure and submit the report to the Council within such time as may be prescribed.

SECTION: 27

The Actuaries Act, 2006 27. Appointment of Prosecution Director. - 1. The Council may, by notification, appoint a Prosecution Director and such other employees to assist the Disciplinary Committee in making inquiries in respect of any information or complaint received by the Council under the provisions of this Act. 2. In order to make inquiries under the provisions of this Act, the Prosecution Director shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.

SECTION: 28

The Actuaries Act, 2006 28. Authority, Council, Disciplinary Committee and Prosecution Director to have powers of civil court. - For the purposes of an inquiry under the provisions of this Act, the Authority, the Disciplinary Committee and the Prosecution Director shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:- a. summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; b. the discovery and production of any document; and c. receiving evidence on affidavit.

SECTION: 29

The Actuaries Act, 2006 29. Action by Council on Disciplinary Committee's report. - 1. On receipt of a report from the Disciplinary Committee, if the Council is satisfied that the member of the Institute is guilty of any professional or other misconduct, it shall record its findings accordingly and shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 30. 2. In case the Council is not satisfied with the report of the Disciplinary Committee and is of the opinion that it requires further inquiry, it may refer the report again to the Disciplinary Committee for such further inquiry as may be directed through an order of the Council. 3. If the Council disagrees with the findings of the Disciplinary Committee, it may direct the Prosecution Director or itself make an appeal to the Authority.

SECTION: 3

The Actuaries Act, 2006 Chapter II Institute of Actuaries of India 3. Incorporation of Institute - 1. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, all persons whose names are entered in the register of the Actuarial Society at the commencement of this Act and all persons who may thereafter have their names entered in the register to be maintained under this Act, so long as they continue to have their names borne on the register, are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of the Institute of Actuaries of India and all such persons shall be known as members of the Institute. 2. The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall have power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and shall by its name sue or be sued. 3. The head office of the Institute shall be situated at such place as may be decided by the Central Government.

SECTION: 30

The Actuaries Act, 2006 30. Member to be afforded opportunity of being heard. - Where the Council is of the opinion that a member is guilty of a professional or other misconduct mentioned in the Schedule, it shall afford to the member a reasonable opportunity of being heard before making any order against him and may thereafter take any one or more of the following actions, namely:- a. reprimand the member; or b. remove the name of the member from the register permanently or for such period, as it thinks fit. c. impose such fine as it may think fit, which may extend to five lakh rupees. Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "member of the Institute" includes a person who was a member of the Institute on the date of the alleged misconduct although he has ceased to be a member of the Institute at the time of the inquiry.

SECTION: 31

The Actuaries Act, 2006 31. Professional or other misconduct defined. - For the purposes of this Act, the expression "professional or other misconduct" shall be deemed to include any act or omission provided in the Schedule, but nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or abridge in any way the power conferred or duty cast on the Disciplinary Committee or the Prosecution Director to inquire into the conduct of any member of the Institute under any other circumstances.
