DOCUMENT_ID: ACT021

TITLE: Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Act

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Parliament of India

SOURCE: Indian-Laws Dataset

DESCRIPTION:
Indian legislation containing 25 legal sections.






DOMAIN: Administrative and Regulatory Law

SUBDOMAIN: Government Regulation

SOURCE_TYPE: Legislative Legal Text

KEYWORDS: prevention, control, pollution, administrative and regulatory law, government regulation

CONTENT:

SECTION: 1

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 1. Short Title, Extent and Commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. (2) It extends to the whole of India. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

SECTION: 10

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 10. Meetings of Board. (1) For the purposes of this Act, a Board shall meet at least once in every three months and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed : Provided that if, in the opinion of the Chairman, any business of an urgent nature is to be transacted, he may convene a meeting of the Board at such time as he thinks fit for the aforesaid purpose. (2) Copies of the minutes of the meetings under sub-section (1) shall be forwarded to the Central Board and to the State Government concerned.

SECTION: 11

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 11. Constitution of Committees. (1) A Board may constitute as many committees consisting wholly of members or partly of members and partly of other persons and for such purpose or purposes as it may think fit. (2) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at time and at such place, and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed. (3) The members of a committee other than the members of the Board shall be paid such fees and allowances, for attending its meetings and for attending to any other work of the Board as may be prescribed

SECTION: 12

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 12. Temporary Association of Persons with Board for Particular Purposes. (1) A Board may associate with itself in such manner, and for such purposes, as may be prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire to obtain in performing any of its functions under this Act. (2) A person associated with the Board under sub-section (1) for any purpose shall have right to take part in the discussions of the Board relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a light to vote at a meeting of the Board and shall not be a member of the Board for any other purpose. (3) A person associated with a Board under sub-section (1) shall be entitled to receive such fees and allowances as may be prescribed.

SECTION: 13

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 13. Vacancy in Board not to Invalidate Acts or Proceedings. No act or proceeding of a Board or any committee thereof shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board or such committee, as the case may be.

SECTION: 14

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 14. Member-Secretary and Officers and Others Employees of State Boards. (1) The terms and conditions of service of the member-secretary of a State Board constituted under this Act shall be such as may be prescribed. (2) The member-secretary of a State Board, whether constituted under this Act or not, shall exercise such powers and performs such duties as may be prescribed, or as may, from time to time, be delegated to him by the State Board or its Chairman. (3) Subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government in this behalf, a State Board, whether constituted under this Act or not, may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under this Act. (4) The method of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay of the officers (other than member-secretary) and other employees of a State Board appointed under sub-section (3) shall be such as may be determined by regulations made by the State Board under this Act. (5) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, a State Board constituted under this Act may from time to time appoint any qualified person to be a consultant to the Board and pay him such salary and allowances or fees, as it thinks fit.

SECTION: 15

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 15. Delegation of Powers. A State Board may, by general or special order, delegate to the Chairman or the member-secretary or any other officer of the Board subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary.

SECTION: 16

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 16. Functions of Central Board. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and without prejudice to the performance of its functions under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974), the main functions of the Central Board shall be to improve the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate air pollution in the country. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing functions, the Central Board may - (a) advise the Central Government on any matter concerning the improvement of the quality of air and the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; (b) plan and cause to be executed a nationwide programme for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; (c) co-ordinate the activities of the State Boards and resolve disputes among them; (d) provide technical assistance and guidance to the State Boards, carry out and sponsor investigations and research relating to problems of air-pollution and prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; (dd) perform such of the functions of any State Board as may be specified in an order made under sub-section (2) of Section 18; (e) plan and organize the training of persons engaged or to be engaged in programmes for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution on such terms and conditions as the Central Board may specify; (f) organize through mass media a comprehensive programme regarding the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; (g) collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data relating to air pollution and the measures devised for its effective prevention, control or abatement and prepare manuals, codes or guides relating to prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; (h) lay down standards for the quality of air; (i) collect and disseminate information is respect of matters relating to air pollution; (j) perform such other functions as may be prescribed. (3) The Central Board may establish or recognize a laboratory or laboratories to enable the Central Board to perform its functions under this section efficiently. (4) The Central Board may - (a) delegate any of its functions under this Act generally or specially to any of the committees appointed by it; (b) do such other things and perform such other acts as it may think necessary for the proper discharge of its functions and generally for the purpose of carrying into effect the purposes of this Act.

SECTION: 17

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 17. Functions of State Boards. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and without prejudice to the performance of its functions, if any, under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974), the functions of a State Board shall be - (a) to plan a comprehensive programme for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution and to secure the execution thereof; (b) to advise the State Government on any matter concerning the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; (c) to collect and disseminate information relating to air pollution; (d) to collaborate with the Central Board in organizing the training of persons engaged or to be engaged in programmes relating to prevention, control or abatement of air pollution and to organize mass-education programme relating thereto; (e) to inspect, at all reasonable times, any control equipment, industrial plant or manufacturing process and to give, by order, such directions to such persons as it may consider necessary to take steps for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; (f) to inspect air pollution control areas at such intervals as it may think necessary, assess the qualify of air therein and take steps for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution in such areas; (g) to lay down, in consultation with the Central Board and having regard to the standards for the quality of air laid down by the Central Board, standards for emission of air pollutants into the atmosphere from industrial plants and automobiles or for the discharge of any air pollutant into the atmosphere from any other source whatsoever not being a ship or an aircraft : Provided that different standards for emission may be laid down under this clause for different industrial plants having regard to the quantity and composition of emission of air pollutants into the atmosphere from such industrial plants; (h) to advise the State Government with respect to the suitability of any premises or location for carrying on any industry which is likely to cause air pollution; (i) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed or as may, from time to time, be entrusted to it by the Central Board or the State Government; (j) to do such other things and to perform such other acts as its may think necessary for the proper discharge of its functions and generally for the purpose of carrying into effect the purposes of this Act. (2) A State Board may establish or recognize a laboratory or laboratories to enable the State Board to perform its functions under this Section efficiently.

SECTION: 18

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 18. Power to give Directions. In the performance of its functions under this Act - (a) the Central Board shall be bound by such directions in writing as the Central Government may give to it; and (b) every State Board shall be bound by such directions in writing as the Central Board or the State Government may give to it : Provided that where a direction given by the State Government is inconsistent with the direction given by the Central Board, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government for its decision. (11) (2) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that any State Board has defaulted in complying with any directions given by the Central Board under sub-section (1) and as a result of such default a grave emergency has arisen and it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, by order, direct the Central Board to perform any of the functions of the State Board in relation to such area, for such period and for such purposes, as may be specified in the order. (3) Where the Central Board performs any of the functions of the State Board in pursuance of a direction under sub-section (2), the expresses, if any, incurred by the Central Board with respect to the performance of such functions may, if the State Board is empowered to recover such expenses, be recovered by the Central Board with interest (at such reasonable rate as the Central Government may, by order, fix) from the date when a demand for such expenses is made until it is paid from the person or persons concerned as arrears of land revenue or of public demand.

SECTION: 19

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 19. Power to Declare Air Pollution Control Areas. (1) The State Government may, after consultation with the State Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare in such manner as may be prescribed, any area or areas within the State as air pollution control area or areas for the purposes of this Act. (2) The State Government may, after consultation with the State Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, - a. alter any air pollution control area whether by way of extension or reduction; b. declare a new air pollution control area in which may be merged one or more existing air pollution control areas or any part or parts thereof. (3) If the State Government, after consultation with the State Board, is of opinion that the use of any fuel, other than an approved fuel, in any air pollution control area or part thereof, may cause or is likely to cause air pollution, it may by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit the use of such fuel in such area or part thereof with effect from such date (being not less than three months from the date of publication of the notification) as may be specified in the notification. (4) The State Government may, after consultation with the State Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that with effect from such date as may be specified therein, no appliance, other than an approved appliance, shall be used in the premises situated in an air pollution control area : Provided that different dates may be specified for different parts of an air pollution control area or for the use of different appliances. (5) If the State Government, after consultation with the State Board, is of opinion that the burning of any material (not being fuel) in any air pollution control area or part thereof may cause or is likely to cause air pollution, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit the burning of such material in such area or part thereof.

SECTION: 2

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 2. Definitions. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "air pollution" means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance [ 2 (including noise) 2 ] present in the atmosphere in such concentration as may be or tend to be injurious to human beings or other living creatures or plants or property or environment; (b) "air pollution" means the presence in the atmosphere of any air pollutant; (c) "approved appliance" means any equipment or gadget used for the burning of any combustible material or for generating or consuming any fume, gas or particulate matter and approved by the State Board for the purposes of this Act; (d) "approved fuel" means any fuel approved by the State Board for the purposes of this Act; (e) "automobile" means any vehicle powered either by internal combustion engine or by any method of generating power to drive such vehicle by burning fuel; (f) "Board" means the Central Board or a State Board; (g) "Central Board" means the [ 3 Central Pollution Control Board 3 ] constituted under Section 3 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974); (h) "chimney" includes any structure with an opening or outlet from or through which any air pollutant may be emitted; (i) "control equipment" means any apparatus, device, equipment or system to control the quality and manner of emission of any air pollutant and includes any device used for securing the efficient operation of any industrial plant; (j) "emission" means any solid or liquid or gaseous substance coming out of any chimney, duct or flue or any other outlet; (k) "industrial plant" means any plant used for any industrial or trade purposes and emitting any air pollutant into the atmosphere; (l) "member" means a member of the Central Board or a State Board, as the case may be, and includes the Chairman thereof; [ 4 (m) "occupier", in relation to any factory or premises, means the person who has control over the affairs of the factory or the premises, and includes, in relation to any substance, the person in possession of the substance; 4 ] (n) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government; (o) "State Board" means, - (i) in relation to a State in which the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974), is in force and the State Government has constituted for that State [ 4 State Pollution Control Board 4 ] under Section 4 of that Act, the said State Board; and Comments: "We have therefore reflected over the various aspects of this rather difficult and complex question with great anxiety and care and taking an overall view of the diverse considerations we have, with considerable hesitation, bordering almost on trepidations reached the conclusion that, pending consideration of the issue whether the caustic chlorine plant should be directed to be shifted and relocated at some other place, the caustic chlorine plant should be allowed to be restarted by the management of Shriram, subject to certain stringent conditions which we propose to specify" M. C. Mehta v. Union of India. AIR 1987 SUPREME COURT 965

SECTION: 20

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 20. Power to give Instructions for Ensuring Standards for Emission From Automobiles. With a view to ensuring that the standards for emission of air pollutants from automobiles laid down by the State Board under clause (g) of sub-section (1) of Section 17 are compiled with, the State Government shall, in consultation with the State Board, give such instructions as may be deemed necessary to the concerned authority in charge of registration of motor vehicles under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939), and such authority shall, notwithstanding anything contained in that Act or the rules made thereunder be found to comply with such instructions.

SECTION: 21

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 21. Restrictions on Use of Certain Industrial Plants. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, no person shall, without the previous consent of the State Board, establish or operate any industrial plant in an air pollution control area : Provided that a person operating any industrial plant in any air pollution control area immediately before the commencement of Section 9 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Act, 1987, for which no consent was necessary prior to such commencement, may continue to do so for a period of three months from such commencement or, if he has made an application for such consent within the said period of three months, till the disposal of such application. (2) An application for consent of the State Board under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed and shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain the particulars of the industrial plant and such other particulars as may be prescribed : Provided that where any person, immediately before the declaration of any area as an air pollution control area, operates in such area any industrial plant such person shall make the application under this sub-section within such period (being not less than three months from the date of such declaration) as may be prescribed and where such person makes such application, he shall be deemed to be operating such industrial plant with the consent of the State Board until the consent applied for has been refused. (3) The State Board may make such inquiry as it may deem fit in respect of the application for consent referred to in sub-section (1) and in making any such inquiry, shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed. (4) Within a period of four months after the receipt of the application for consent referred to in sub-section (1), the State Board shall, by order in writing, and for reasons to be recorded in the order, grant the consent applied for subject to such conditions and for such period as may be specified in the order, or refuse such consent : Provided that it shall be open to the State Board to cancel such consent before the expiry of the period for which it is granted or refuse further consent after such expiry if the conditions subject to which such consent has been granted are not fulfilled : Provided further that before canceling a consent or refusing a further consent under the first proviso, a reasonable opportunity of being heard shall be given to the person concerned. (5) Every person to whom consent has been granted by the State Board under sub-section (4), shall comply with the following conditions, namely :- (i) the control equipment of such specifications as the State Board may approved in this behalf shall be installed and operated in the premises where the industry is carried on or proposed to be carried on : (ii) the existing control equipment, if any, shall be altered or replaced in accordance with the directions of the State Board; (iii) the control equipment referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) shall be kept at all times in good running condition; (iv) chimney, wherever necessary, of such specifications as the State Board may approve in this behalf shall be erected or re-erected in such premises; (v) such other conditions as the State Board may specify in this behalf; and (vi) the conditions referred to in clauses (i), (ii) and (iv) shall be complied with within such period as the State Board may specify in this behalf : Provided that in the case of a person operating any industrial plant in an air pollution control area immediately before the date of declaration of such area as an air pollution control area, the period so specified shall not be less than six months : Provided further that - (a) after the installation of any control equipment in accordance with the specifications under clause (i), or (b) after the alteration or replacement of any control equipment in accordance with the directions of the State Board under clause (ii), or (c) after the erection or re-erection of any chimney under clause (iv), no control equipment or chimney shall be altered or replaced or, as case may be, erected or re-erected except with the previous approval of the State Board. (6) If due to any technological improvement or otherwise the State Board is of opinion that all or any of the conditions referred to in sub-section (5) require or requires variation (including the change of any control equipment, either in whole or in part), the State Board shall, after giving the person to whom consent has been granted an opportunity of being heard, vary all or any of such conditions and thereupon such person shall be bound to comply with the conditions as so varied. (7) Where a person to whom consent has been granted by the State Board under sub-section (4) transfers his interest in the industry to any other person, such consent shall be deemed to have been granted to such other person and he shall be bound to comply with all the conditions subject to which it was granted as if the consent was granted to him originally.

SECTION: 22

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 22. Persons Carrying on Industry, Etc., not to Allow Emission of Air Pollutants in Excess of the Standards Laid Down by State Board. No person [ 17 * * * 17 ] operating any industrial plant, in any air pollution control area shall discharge or cause or permit to be discharged the emission of any air pollutant in excess of the standards laid down by the State Board under clause (9) of sub-section (1) of Section 17.

SECTION: 23

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 23. Furnishing of Information to State Board and Other Agencies in Certain Cases. (1) Where in any area the emission of any air pollutant into the atmosphere in excess of the standards laid down by the State Board occurs or is apprehended to occur due to accident or other unforseen act or event, the person in charge of the premises from where such emission occurs or is apprehended to occur shall forthwith intimate the fact of such occurrence or the apprehension of such occurrence to the State Board and to such authorities or agencies as may be prescribed. (2) On receipt of information with respect to the fact or the apprehension of any occurrence of the nature referred to in sub-section (1), whether through intimation under that sub-section or otherwise, the State Board and the authorities or agencies shall, as early as practicable, cause such remedial measures to be taken as are necessary to mitigate the emission of such air pollutants. (3) Expenses, if any, incurred by the State Board, authority or agency with respect to the remedial measures referred to in sub-section (2) together with interest (at such reasonable rate, as the State Government may, by order, fix) from the date when a demand for the expenses is made until it is paid, may be recovered by the Board, authority or agency from the person, concerned, as arrears of land revenue, or of public demand.

SECTION: 24

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 24. Power of Entry and Inspection. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person empowered by a State Board in this behalf shall have a right to enter, at all reasonable times with such assistance as he considers necessary, any place - (a) for the purpose of performing any of the functions of the State Board entrusted to him; (b) for the purpose of determining whether and if so in what manner, any such functions are to be performed or whether any provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any notice, order, direction or authorization served, made, given or granted under this Act is being or has been complied with; (c) for the purpose of examining and testing any control equipment, industrial plant, record, register, document or any other material object or for conducting a search of any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder has been or is about to be committed and for seizing any such control equipment, industrial plant, record, register, document or other material object if he has reasons to believe that it may furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder. (2) Every person operating any control equipment or any industrial plant, in an air pollution control area shall be bound to render all assistance to the person empowered by the State Board under sub-section (1) for carrying out the functions under that sub-section and if he fails to do so without any reasonable cause or excuse, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act. (3) If any person willfully delays or obstructs any person empowered by the State Board under sub-section (1) in the discharge of his duties, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act. (4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or, in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, or any area in which that Code is not in force, the provisions of any corresponding law in force in that State or area, shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under Section 94 of the said Code or, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the said law.

SECTION: 25

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 25. Power to Obtain Information. For the purposes of carrying out the functions entrusted to it, the State Board or any officer empowered by it in that behalf may call for any information (including information regarding the types of air pollutants emitted into the atmosphere and the level of the emission of such air pollutants) from the occupier or any other person carrying on any industry or operating any control equipment or industrial plant and for the purpose of verifying the correctness of such information, the State Board or such officer shall have the right to inspect the premises where such industry, control equipment or industrial plant is being carried on or operated.

SECTION: 26

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 26. Power to take Samples of Air or Emission and Procedure to be followed in Connection Therewith. (1) A State Board or any officer empowered by it in this behalf shall have power to take, for the purpose of analysis, samples of air or emission from any chimney, flue or duct or any other outlet in such manner as may be prescribed. (2) The result of any analysis of a sample of emission taken under sub-section (1) shall be admissible in evidence in any legal proceeding unless the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) are complied with. (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), when a sample of emission is taken for analysis under sub-section (1), the person taking the sample shall - (a) serve on the occupier or his agent, a notice, then and there, in such form as may be prescribed, of his intention to have it so analyzed; (b) in the presence of the occupier or his agent, collect a sample of emission for analysis; (c) cause the sample to be placed in a container or containers which shall be marked and sealed and shall also be singed both by the person taking the sample and the occupier or his agent; (d) send, without delay, the container or containers to the laboratory established or recognized by the State Board under Section 17 or, if a request in that behalf is made by the occupier or his agent when the notice is served on him under clause (a), to the laboratory established or specified under sub-section (1) of Section 28. (4) When a sample of emission is taken for analysis under sub-section (1) and the person taking the sample serves on the occupier or his agent, a notice under clause (a) of sub-section (3), then - (a) in a case where the occupier or his agent willfully absents himself, the person taking the sample shall collect the sample of emission for analysis to be placed in a container or containers which shall be marked and sealed and shall also be signed by the person taking the sample, and (b) in a case where the occupier or his agent is present at the time of taking the sample but refuses to sign the marked and sealed container or containers of the sample of emission as required under clause (c) of sub-section (3), the marked and sealed container or containers shall be signed by the person taking the sample, and the container or containers shall be sent without delay by the person taking the sample for analysis to the laboratory established or specified under sub-section (1) of Section 28 and such person shall inform the Government analyst appointed under sub-section (1) of Section 29, in writing, about the willful absence of the occupier or his agent, or, as the case may be, his refusal to sign the container or containers.

SECTION: 27

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 27. Reports of the Result of Analysis on Samples Taken Under Section 26. (1) Where a sample of emission has been sent for analysis to the laboratory established or recognized by the State Board, the board analyst appointed under sub-section (2) of Section 29 shall analyze the sample and submit a report in the prescribed form of such analysis in triplicate to the State Board. (2) On receipt of the report under sub-section (1), one copy of the report shall be sent by the State Board to the occupier or his agent referred to in Section 26, another copy shall be preserved for production before the court in case any legal proceedings are taken against him and the other copy shall be kept by the State Board. (3) Where a sample has been sent for analysis under clause (d) of sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of Section 26 to any laboratory mentioned therein, the Government analyst referred to in the said sub-section (4) shall analyst the sample and submit a report in the prescribed form of the result of the analysis in triplicate to the State Board which shall comply with the provisions of sub-section (2). (4) Any cost incurred in getting any sample analyzed at the request of the occupier or his agent as provided in clause (d) of sub-section (3) of Section 26 or when he willfully absents himself or refuses to sign the marked and sealed container or containers of sample of emission under sub-section (4) of other section, shall be payable by such occupier or his agent and in case of default the same shall be recoverable from him as arrears of land revenue or of public demand.

SECTION: 28

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 28. State Air Laboratory. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, - (a) establish one or more State Air Laboratories; or (b) specify one or more laboratories or institutes as State Air Laboratories to carry out the functions entrusted to the State Air Laboratory under this Act. (2) The State Government may, after consultation with the State Board, make rules prescribing - (a) the functions of the State Air Laboratory; (b) the procedure for the submission to the said Laboratory of samples of air or emission for analysis or tests, the form of the Laboratory's report thereon and the fees payable in respect of such report; (c) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to enable that Laboratory to carry out its functions.

SECTION: 29

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 29. Analysts. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit and having the prescribed qualifications to be Government analysts for the purpose of analysis of samples of air or emission sent for analysis to any laboratory established or specified under sub-section (1) of Section 28. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 14, the State Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and with the approval of the State Government, appoint such persons as it thinks fit and having the prescribed qualifications to be Board analysts for the purpose of analysis of samples of air or emission set for analysis to any laboratory established or recognized under Section 17.

SECTION: 3

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 3. Central Pollution Control Board. The Central Pollution Control Board constituted under Section 3 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974), shall, without prejudice to the exercise and performance of its powers and functions under that Act, exercise the powers and perform the functions of the Central Pollution Control Board for the prevention and control of air pollution under this Act.

SECTION: 30

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 30. Report of Analysts. Any document purporting to be a report signed by a Government analyst or, as the case may be, a State Board analyst may be used as evidence of the facts stated therein in any proceeding under this Act.

SECTION: 31

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 31. Appeals. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State Board under this Act may, within thirty days from the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to such authority (hereinafter referred to as the Appellate Authority) as the State Government may think fit to constitute : Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if such authority is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filling the appeal in time. (2) The Appellate Authority shall consist of a single person or three persons as the State Government may think fit to be appointed by the State Government. (3) The form and the manner in which an appeal may be preferred under sub-section (1), the fees payable for such appeal and the procedure to be followed by the Appellate Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. (4) On receipt of an appeal preferred under sub-section (1), the Appellate Authority shall, after giving the appellant and the State Board an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.
