DOCUMENT_ID: ACT019

TITLE: Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Act

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Parliament of India

SOURCE: Indian-Laws Dataset

DESCRIPTION:
Indian legislation containing 25 legal sections.






DOMAIN: Agricultural Law

SUBDOMAIN: Agriculture and Rural Regulation

SOURCE_TYPE: Legislative Legal Text

KEYWORDS: agricultural, processed, food, products, export, development, authority, agricultural law, agriculture and rural regulation

CONTENT:

SECTION: 1

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 Chapter I Preliminary 1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985. (2) It extends to the whole of India. (3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.

SECTION: 10

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 10. Functions of the Authority.- (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to undertake, by such measures as it thinks fit, the development and promotion, under the control of the Central Government, of export of Scheduled products. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the measures referred to therein may provide for- (a) the development of industries relating to the Scheduled products for export by way of providing financial assistance or otherwise for undertaking surveys and feasibility studies, participation in the equity capital through joint ventures and other reliefs and subsidy schemes; (b) the registration of persons as exporters of the Scheduled products on payment of such fees as may be prescribed; (c) the fixing of standards and specifications for the Scheduled products for the purposes of export; (d) the carrying out of inspection of meat and meat products in any slaughterhouse, processing plant, storage premises, conveyances or other places where such products are kept or handled for the purpose of ensuring the quality of such products; (e) the improving of packaging of the Scheduled products; (f) the improving of the marketing of the Scheduled products outside India; (g) the promotion of export oriented production and development of the Scheduled products; (h) the collection of statistics from the owners of factories or establishments engaged in the production, processing, packaging, marketing or export of the Scheduled products or from such other persons as may be prescribed on any matter relating to the Scheduled products; and the publication of the statistics so collected, or of any portions thereof or extracts therefrom; (i) the training in various aspects of the industries connected with the Scheduled products; (j) such other matters as may be prescribed.

SECTION: 11

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 11. Power to supersede the Authority.- (1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that the Authority is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in the performance of, the duty imposed on it by or under this Act or has exceeded or abused its powers, or has wilfully or without sufficient cause, failed to comply with any direction issued by the Central Government under section 20, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Authority for such period as may be specified in the notification: Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section, the Central Government shall give reasonable time to the Authority to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanation and objections, if any, of the Authority. (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding the Authority,- (a) all the members of the Authority shall, notwithstanding that their term of office has not expired as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such members; (b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or performed by or on behalf of the Authority shall, during the period of supersession, be exercised and performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct; (c) all property vested in the Authority shall, during the period of supersession, vest in the Central Government. (3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government may- (a) extend the period of supersession for such further period as it may consider necessary; or (b) reconstitute the Authority in the manner provided in section 4.

SECTION: 12

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 Chapter III Registration 12. Registration of exporters.- (1) Every person exporting any one or more of the Scheduled products shall, before the expiration of one month from the date on which he undertakes such export or before the expiration of three months from the date of coming into force of this section, whichever is later, apply to the Authority to be registered as an exporter of the Scheduled product or Scheduled products: Provided that the Authority may, for sufficient reason, extend the time-limit for registration by such period as it thinks fit. (2) Registration once made shall continue to be in force until it is cancelled by the Authority.

SECTION: 13

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 13. Application, cancellation, fee payable and other matters relating to registration.- The form of application for registration under section 12 and for the cancellation of such registration, the fee payable on such applications, the particulars to be included in such applications, the procedure to be followed in granting and cancelling registration and the registers to be kept by the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.

SECTION: 14

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 14. Returns to be made by exporters.- (1) Every exporter, referred to in sub-section (1) of section 12, shall furnish to the Authority at the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner such returns as may be prescribed. (2) The Authority may authorise a member or any of its officers to inspect any processing plant or any other establishment of the exporter at any time to verify the accuracy of any return made under this section.

SECTION: 15

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 Chapter IV Finance, Accounts and Audit 15. Grants or loans by the Central Government.- The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Authority by way of grants or loans such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.

SECTION: 16

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 16. Constitution of Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Fund.- (1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Fund and there shall be credited thereto- (a) any sums of money which the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide from and out of the proceeds of the cess credited under section 4 of the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Cess Act, 1985, after deducting therefrom the expenses of collection of the cess and the amount, if any, refunded; (b) all fees levied and collected in respect of registration and other matters under this Act or the rules made thereunder; (c) any grants or loans that may be made by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act under section 15; and (d) any grants or loans that may be made by any State Government, voluntary organisation or other institution for the purposes of this Act: Provided that no such grant, loan or donation shall be credited to the Fund except with the prior approval of the Central Government. (2) The Fund shall be applied for- (a) meeting the cost of the measures referred to in section 10; (b) meeting the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other employees, as the case may be, of the Authority; (c) meeting the other administrative expenses of the Authority and any other expenses authorised by or under this Act; and (d) repayment of any loan.

SECTION: 17

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 17. Borrowing powers of the Authority.- Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Authority shall have power to borrow on the security of the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Fund or any other asset for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

SECTION: 18

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 18. Accounts and audit.- (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. (2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. (3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority. (4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.

SECTION: 19

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 Chapter V Control by The Central Government 19. Power to prohibit or control imports and exports of Scheduled products.- (1) The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise controlling the import or export of the Scheduled products, either generally or in specified classes of cases. (2) All Scheduled products to which any order under sub-section (1) applies, shall be deemed to be goods of which the export has been prohibited under section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), and all the provisions of that Act shall have effect accordingly. (3) If any person contravenes any order made under sub-section (1), he shall, without prejudice to any confiscation or penalty to which he may be liable under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), as applied by sub-section (2), be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

SECTION: 2

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Authority" means the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority established under section 4; (b) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Authority; (c) "export" means taking out of India by land, sea or air; (d) "exporter" means a person registered as an exporter of Scheduled products under section 12; (e) "member" means a member of the Authority and includes the Chairman; (f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (g) "processing" in relation to 2[Scheduled products or, as the case may be, Special products] includes the process of preservation of such products such as canning, freezing, drying, salting, smoking, peeling or filleting and any other method of processing which the Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf; (h) "regulations" means regulations made under this Act; (i) "Scheduled product" means any of the agricultural or processed food products included in 3[the First Schedule]; 4[(j) "Special product" means any of the agricultural or processed food products included in the Second Schedule.] 1. 13th February, 1986, vide notification No. S.O. 55(E), dated 13th February, 1986, see Gazette of India, 1986, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 2. Subs. by Act 20 of 2009, s. 2, for "Scheduled products" (w.e.f. 13-10-2008). 3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "the Schedule" (w.e.f. 13-10-2008). 4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 13-10-2008). 5. Subs. by s. 3. ibid., for section 3 (w.e.f. 13-10-2008).

SECTION: 20

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 20. Directions by the Central Government.- The Authority shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.

SECTION: 21

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 21. Returns and reports.- (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion and development of the export of the Scheduled products, as the Central Government may, from time to time, require. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Authority shall, as soon as possible, after the end of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report in such form and before such date, as may be prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programmes during the previous financial year. (3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is received, before each House of Parliament.

SECTION: 22

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 Chapter VI Miscellaneous 22. Penalty for making false reports.- Any person who, being required by or under this Act to furnish any return, fails to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false and which he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.

SECTION: 23

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 23. Penalties for obstructing a member or officer of the Authority in the discharge of his duty and for failure to produce books and records.- Any person who- (a) obstructs any member authorised by the Chairman in writing or any officer or other employee of the Authority authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or by the Authority, in the exercise of any power conferred, or in the discharge of any duty imposed on him by or under this Act; or (b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record fails to produce such book or record when required to do so by or under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

SECTION: 24

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 24. Other penalties.- Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made hereunder other than the provisions, the punishment for the contravention whereof has been provided for in sections 19, 22 and 23, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both and in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.

SECTION: 25

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 25. Offences by companies.- (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,- (a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and (b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

SECTION: 26

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 26. Jurisdiction of court.- No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.

SECTION: 27

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 27. Previous sanction of the Central Government.- No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be instituted except with previous sanction of the Central Government.

SECTION: 28

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 28. Protection of action taken in good faith.- No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government, or the Authority or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the Authority or such committee, or any officer or other employee of the Central Government or of the Authority or any other person authorised by the Central Government or the Authority, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.

SECTION: 29

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 29. Power to delegate.- The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act (not being the power to make rules under section 32) may also be exercised in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, by such officer or authority as may be specified therein.

SECTION: 3

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 5[3. Power to amend the Schedule.- The Central Government may, having regard to the objects to this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the case may be, omit from, the First Schedule or the Second Schedule any agricultural or processed food product and on such addition, or as the case may be, omission, such product shall be, or shall cease to be, a Scheduled product or Special product as the case may be.]

SECTION: 30

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 30. Suspension of operation of this Act.- (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions imposed by this Act should cease to be imposed or if it considers necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to such extent and either indefinitely or for such period as may be specified in the notification, the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act. (2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has under sub-section (1) been suspended or relaxed indefinitely, such suspension or relaxation may, at any time while this Act remains in force, be removed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.

SECTION: 31

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 31. Application of other laws not barred.- The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
