DOCUMENT_ID: ACT001

TITLE: Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Act

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Parliament of India

SOURCE: Indian-Laws Dataset

DESCRIPTION:
Indian legislation containing 25 legal sections.






DOMAIN: Technology and Digital Law

SUBDOMAIN: Digital Identity and Data Governance

SOURCE_TYPE: Legislative Legal Text

KEYWORDS: aadhaar, targeted, delivery, financial, subsidies, benefits, services, technology and digital law, digital identity and data governance

CONTENT:

SECTION: 1

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 Chapter I Preliminary 1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016. (2) It shall extend to the whole of India 2*** and save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall also apply to any offence or contravention thereunder committed outside India by any person. (3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may, be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of that provision.

SECTION: 10

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 10. Central Identities Data Repository.- The Authority may engage one or more entities to establish and maintain the Central Identities Data Repository and to perform any other functions as may be specified by regulations.

SECTION: 11

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 Chapter Iv Unique Identification Authorityof Inida 11. Establishment of Authority.- (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Authority to be known as the Unique Identification Authority of India to be responsible for the processes of enrolment and authentication and perform such other functions assigned to it under this Act. (2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. (3) The head office of the Authority shall be in New Delhi. (4) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish its offices at other places in India.

SECTION: 12

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 12. Composition of Authority.- The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson, appointed on part-time or full-time basis, two part-time Members, and the chief executive officer who shall be Member-Secretary of the Authority, to be appointed by the Central Government.

SECTION: 13

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 13. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Authority.- The Chairperson and Members of the Authority shall be persons of ability and integrity having experience and knowledge of at least ten years in matters relating to technology, governance, law, development, economics, finance, management, public affairs or administration.

SECTION: 14

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 14. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.- (1) The Chairperson and the Members appointed under this Act shall hold office for a term of three years from the date on which they assume office and shall be eligible for re-appointment: Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chairperson or Member after he has attained the age of sixty-five years. (2) The Chairperson and every Member shall, before entering office, make and subscribe to, an oath of office and of secrecy, in such form and in such manner and before such Authority as may be prescribed. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Chairperson or Member may- (a) relinquish his office, by giving in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not less than thirty days; or (b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 15. (4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and allowances or remuneration payable to part-time Members shall be such as may be prescribed.

SECTION: 15

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 15. Removal of Chairperson and Members.- (1) The Central Government may remove from office, the Chairperson, or a Member, who- (a) is, or at any time has been adjudged as insolvent; (b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or, as the case may be, a Member; (c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; (d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the Chairperson or, as the case may be, a Member; or (e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest. (2) The Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed under clause (b), clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

SECTION: 16

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 16. Restrictions on Chairperson or Members on employment after cessation of office.- The Chairperson or a Member on ceasing to hold office for any reason, shall not, without previous approval of the Central Government,- (a) accept any employment in, or be connected with the management of any organisation, company or any other entity which has been associated with any work done or contracted out by the Authority, whether directly or indirectly, during his tenure as Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, for a period of three years from the date on which he ceases to hold office: Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any employment under the Central Government or a State Government or local authority or in any statutory authority or any corporation established by or under any Central, State or provincial Act or a Government Company, as defined in clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); (b) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any specific proceeding or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a party and with respect to which the Chairperson or such Member had, before cessation of office, acted for or provided advice to, the Authority; (c) give advice to any person using information which was obtained in his capacity as the Chairperson or a Member and being unavailable to or not being able to be made available to the public; or (d) enter, for a period of three years from his last day in office, into a contract of service with, accept an appointment to a board of directors of, or accept an offer of employment with, an entity with which he had direct and significant official dealings during his term of office.

SECTION: 17

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 17. Functions of Chairperson.- The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Authority, and without prejudice to any provision of this Act, exercise and discharge such other powers and functions of the Authority as may be prescribed.

SECTION: 18

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 18. Chief executive officer.- (1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Authority, not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India, to be appointed by the Central Government. (2) The chief executive officer shall be the legal representative of the Authority and shall be responsible for- (a) the day-to-day administration of the Authority; (b) implementing the work programmes and decisions adopted by the Authority; (c) drawing up of proposal for the Authority's decisions and work programmes; (d) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution of the budget of the Authority; and (e) performing such other functions, or exercising such other powers, as may be specified by regulations. (3) Every year, the chief executive officer shall submit to the Authority for approval- (a) a general report covering all the activities of the Authority in the previous year; (b) programmes of work; (c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and (d) the budget for the coming year. (4) The chief executive officer shall have administrative control over the officers and other employees of the Authority.

SECTION: 19

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 19. Meetings of Authority.- (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, including quorum at such meetings, as may be specified by regulations. (2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, the senior most Member shall preside over the meetings of the Authority. (3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority of votes by the Members present and voting and in the event of anequality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence the presiding Member shall have a casting vote. (4) All decisions of the Authority shall be signed by the Chairperson or any other Member or the Member-Secretary authorised by the Authority in this behalf. (5) If any Member, who is a director of a company and who as such director, has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any manner coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Authority, he shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Authority, and the Member shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of the Authority with respect to that matter.

SECTION: 2

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 4[(a) "Aadhaar number" means an identification number issued to an individual under sub-section (3) of section 3, and includes any alternative virtual identity generated under sub-section (4) of that section;] 5[(aa) "Aadhaar ecosystem" includes enrolling agencies, Registrars, requesting entities, offline verification-seeking entities and any other entity or group of entities as may be specified by regulations;] (b) "Aadhaar number holder" means an individual who has been issued an Aadhaar number under this Act; 4[(ba) "Adjudicating Officer" means an Adjudicating Officer appointed under sub-section (1) of section 33B; (bb) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal referred to in sub-section (1) of section 33C;] (c) "authentication" means the process by which the Aadhaar number alongwith demographic information or biometric information of an individual is submitted to the Central Identities Data Repository for its verification and such Repository verifies the correctness, or the lack thereof, on the basis of information available with it; (d) "authentication record" means the record of the time of authentication and identity of the requesting entity and the response provided by the Authority thereto; (e) "Authority" means the Unique Identification Authority of India established under sub-section (1) of section 11; (f) "benefit" means any advantage, gift, reward, relief, or payment, in cash or kind, provided to an individual or a group of individuals and includes such other benefits as may be notified by the Central Government; (g) "biometric information" means photograph, finger print, Iris scan, or such other biological attributes of an individual as may be specified by regulations; (h) "Central Identities Data Repository" means a centralised database in one or more locations containing all Aadhaar numbers issued to Aadhaar number holders along with the corresponding demographic information and biometric information of such individuals and other information related thereto; (i) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under section 12; 1[(ia) "child" means a person who has not completed eighteen years of age;] (j) "core biometric information" means finger print, Iris scan, or such other biological attribute of an individual as may be specified by regulations; (k) "demographic information" includes information relating to the name, date of birth, address and other relevant information of an individual, as may be specified by regulations for the purpose of issuing an Aadhaar number, but shall not include race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, records of entitlement, income or medical history; (l) "enrolling agency" means an agency appointed by the Authority or a Registrar, as the case may be, for collecting demographic and biometric information of individuals under this Act; (m) "enrolment" means the process, as may be specified by regulations, to collect demographic and biometric information from individuals by the enrolling agencies for the purpose of issuing Aadhaar numbers to such individuals under this Act; (n) "identity information" in respect of an individual, includes his Aadhaar number, his biometric information and his demographic information; (o) "Member" includes the Chairperson and Member of the Authority appointed under section 12; (p) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression "notified" with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations shall be construed accordingly; 1[(pa) "offline verification" means the process of verifying the identity of the Aadhaar number holder without authentication, through such offline modes as may be specified by regulations; (pb) "offline verification-seeking entity" means any entity desirous of undertaking offline verification of an Aadhaar number holder;] (q) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under this Act; (r) "records of entitlement" means records of benefits, subsidies or services provided to, or availed by, any individual under any programme; (s) "Registrar" means any entity authorised or recognised by the Authority for the purpose of enrolling individuals under this Act; (t) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Authority under this Act; (u) "requesting entity" means an agency or person that submits the Aadhaar number, and demographic information or biometric information, of an individual to the Central Identities Data Repository for authentication; (v) "resident" means an individual who has resided in India for a period or periods amounting in all to one hundred and eighty-two days or more in the twelve months immediately preceding the date of application for enrolment; (w) "service" means any provision, facility, utility or any other assistance provided in any form to an individual or a group of individuals and includes such other services as may be notified by the Central Government; (x) "subsidy" means any form of aid, support, grant, subvention, or appropriation, in cash or kind, to an individual or a group of individuals and includes such other subsidies as may be notified by the Central Government. 1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019). 1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019). 2. The words "except the State of Jammu and Kashmir" omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31-10- 2019). 3.12th September, 2016 - Sections 1 to 10, 24 to 47, vide notification No. S.O. 2927 (E), dated 12th September, 2016 see Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, s. 3 (ii). 12th July, 2016- Sections 11 to 20, 22 and 23, 48 to 59, vide notification No. S.O. 2357 (E), dated 12 the July 2016, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s. 3 (ii). 25th July, 2019 - Sections1 to 30, vide notification No. S.O. 2649 (E), dated 25th July, 2019 see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s. 3 (ii). 4. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s, 3, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 25-7-2019). 5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid, (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

SECTION: 20

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 20. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.- No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of- (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; (b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or Member of the Authority; or (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.

SECTION: 21

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 1[21. Officers and other employees of Authority.- (1) The Authority shall appoint such officers and employees as may be required for the discharge of its functions under this Act. (2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and employees of the Authority shall be such as may be specified by regulations.] 1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 10, for section 21 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

SECTION: 22

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 22. Transfer of assets, liabilities of Authority.- On and from the establishment of the Authority- (a) all the assets and liabilities of the Unique Identification Authority of India, established vide notification of the Government of India in the Planning Commission number A-43011/02/2009-Admin. I, dated the 28th January, 2009, shall stand transferred to, and vested in, the Authority. Explanation.- The assets of such Unique Identification Authority of India shall be deemed to include all rights and powers, and all properties, whether movable or immovable, including, in particular, cash balances, deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such properties as may be in the possession of such Unique Identification Authority of India and all books of account and other documents relating to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind; (b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (a), all data and information collected during enrolment, all details of authentication performed, debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for such Unique Identification Authority of India immediately before that day, for or in connection with the purpose of the said Unique Identification Authority of India, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Authority; (c) all sums of money due to the said Unique Identification Authority of India immediately before that day shall be deemed to be due to the Authority; and (d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or against such Unique Identification Authority of India immediately before that day may be continued or may be instituted by or against the Authority.

SECTION: 23

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 23. Powers and functions of Authority.- (1) The Authority shall develop the policy, procedure and systems for issuing Aadhaar numbers to individuals and perform authentication thereof under this Act. (2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the powers and functions of the Authority, inter alia, include- (a) specifying, by regulations, demographic information and biometric information required for enrolment and the processes for collection and verification thereof; (b) collecting demographic information and biometric information from any individual seeking an Aadhaar number in such manner as may be specified by regulations; (c) appointing of one or more entities to operate the Central Identities Data Repository; (d) generating and assigning Aadhaar numbers to individuals; (e) performing authentication of Aadhaar numbers; (f) maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations; (g) omitting and deactivating of an Aadhaar number and information relating thereto in such manner as may be specified by regulations; (h) specifying the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of providing or availing of various subsidies, benefits, services and other purposes for which Aadhaar numbers may be used; (i) specifying, by regulations, the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars, enrolling agencies and service providers and revocation of appointments thereof; (j) establishing, operating and maintaining of the Central Identities Data Repository; (k) sharing, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, the information of Aadhaar number holders, subject to the provisions of this Act; (l) calling for information and records, conducting inspections, inquiries and audit of the operations for the purposes of this Act of the Central Identities Data Repository, Registrars, enrolling agencies and other agencies appointed under this Act; (m) specifying, by regulations, various processes relating to data management, security protocols and other technology safeguards under this Act; (n) specifying, by regulations, the conditions and procedures for issuance of new Aadhaar number to existing Aadhaar number holder; (o) levying and collecting the fees or authorising the Registrars, enrolling agencies or other service providers to collect such fees for the services provided by them under this Act in such manner as may be specified by regulations; (p) appointing such committees as may be necessary to assist the Authority in discharge of its functions for the purposes of this Act; (q) promoting research and development for advancement in biometrics and related areas, including usage of Aadhaar numbers through appropriate mechanisms; (r) evolving of, and specifying, by regulations, policies and practices for Registrars, enrolling agencies and other service providers; (s) setting up facilitation centres and grievance redressal mechanism for redressal of grievances of individuals, Registrars, enrolling agencies and other service providers; (t) such other powers and functions as may be prescribed. (3) The Authority may,- (a) enter into Memorandum of Understanding or agreement, as the case may be, with the Central Government or State Governments or Union territories or other agencies for the purpose of performing any of the functions in relation to collecting, storing, securing or processing of information or delivery of Aadhaar numbers to individuals or performing authentication; (b) by notification, appoint such number of Registrars, engage and authorise such agencies to collect, store, secure, process information or do authentication or perform such other functions in relation thereto, as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act. (4) The Authority may engage such consultants, advisors and other persons as may be required for efficient discharge of its functions under this Act on such allowances or remuneration and terms and conditions as may be specified by contract.

SECTION: 24

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 Chapter V Grants, Accounts and Audit and Annual Report 24. Grants by Central Government.- The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority, grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.

SECTION: 25

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 1[25. Fund.- (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Unique Identification Authority of India Fund and there shall be credited thereto- (a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; and (b) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the Central Government. (2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting- (a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members and administrative expenses including the salaries, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of officers and other employees of the Authority; and (b) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.] 1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 12, for section 25 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

SECTION: 26

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 26. Accounts and audit.- (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. (2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. (3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection with the audit the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts, and in particular, shall have the right to demand production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority. (4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Authority and the Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.

SECTION: 27

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 27. Returns and annual report, etc.- (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and statements and particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the Authority, as the Central Government may from time to time require. (2) The Authority shall prepare, once in every year, and in such form and manner and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving- (a) a description of all the activities of the Authority for the previous years; (b) the annual accounts for the previous year; and (c) the programmes of work for coming year. (3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be laid by the Central Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.

SECTION: 28

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 Chapter VI Protectionof Information 28. Security and confidentiality of information.- (1) The Authority shall ensure the security of identity information and authentication records of individuals. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority shall ensure confidentiality of identity information and authentication records of individuals. (3) The Authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the information in the possession or control of the Authority, including information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository, is secured and protected against access, use or disclosure not permitted under this Act or regulations made thereunder, and against accidental or intentional destruction, loss or damage. (4) Without prejudice to sub-sections (1) and (2), the Authority shall- (a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and organisational security measures; (b) ensure that the agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons appointed or engaged for performing any function of the Authority under this Act, have in place appropriate technical and organisational security measures for the information; and (c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered into with such agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons, impose obligations equivalent to those imposed on the Authority under this Act, and require such agencies, consultants, advisors and other persons to act only on instructions from the Authority. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, and save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Authority or any of its officers or other employees or any agency that maintains the Central Identities Data Repository shall not, whether during his service or thereafter, reveal any information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository or authentication record to anyone: Provided that an Aadhaar number holder may request the Authority to provide access to his identity information excluding his core biometric information in such manner as may be specified by regulations.

SECTION: 29

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 29. Restriction on sharing information.- (1) No core biometric information, collected or created under this Act, shall be- (a) shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever; or (b) used for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar numbers and authentication under this Act. (2) The identity information, other than core biometric information, collected or created under this Act may be shared only in accordance with the provisions of this Act and in such manner as may be specified by regulations. 1[(3) No identity information available with a requesting entity or offline verification-seeking entity shall be- (a) used for any purpose, other than the purposes informed in writing to the individual at the time of submitting any information for authentication or offline verification; or (b) disclosed for any purpose, other than purposes informed in writing to the individual at the time of submitting any information for authentication or offline verification: Provided that the purposes under clauses (a) and (b) shall be in clear and precise language understandable to the individual.] (4) No Aadhaar number 1[, demographic information or photograph] collected or created under this Act in respect of an Aadhaar number holder shall be published, displayed or posted publicly, except for the purposes as may be specified by regulations. 1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 13, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 25-7-2019)

SECTION: 3

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 Chapter II Enrolment 3. Aadhaar number.- (1) Every resident shall be entitled to obtain an Aadhaar number by submitting his demographic information and biometric information by undergoing the process of enrolment: Provided that the Central Government may, from time to time, notify such other category of individuals who may be entitled to obtain an Aadhaar number. (2) The enrolling agency shall, at the time of enrolment, inform the individual undergoing enrolment of the following details in such manner as may be specified by regulations, namely:- (a) the manner in which the information shall be used; (b) the nature of recipients with whom the information is intended to be shared during authentication; and (c) the existence of a right to access information, the procedure for making requests for such access, and details of the person or department in-charge to whom such requests can be made. (3) On receipt of the demographic information and biometric information under sub-section (1), the Authority shall, after verifying the information, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, issue an Aadhaar number to such individual. 1[(4) The Aadhaar number issued to an individual under sub-section (3) shall be a twelve-digit identification number and any alternative virtual identity as an alternative to the actual Aadhaar number of an individual that shall be generated by the Authority in such manner as may be specified by regulations.] 1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019). Back

SECTION: 30

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 30. Biometric information deemed to be sensitive personal information.- The biometric information collected and stored in electronic form, in accordance with this Act and regulations made thereunder, shall be deemed to be "electronic record" and "sensitive personal data or information", and the provisions contained in the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) and the rules made thereunder shall apply to such information, in addition to, and to the extent not in derogation of the provisions of this Act. Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, the expressions- (a) "electronic form" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (r) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000); (b) "electronic record" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (t) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000); (c) "sensitive personal data or information" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (iii) of the Explanation to section 43A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).

SECTION: 31

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 31. Alteration of demographic information or biometric information.- (1) In case any demographic information of an Aadhaar number holder is found incorrect or changes subsequently, the Aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority to alter such demographic information in his record in the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations. (2) In case any biometric information of Aadhaar number holder is lost or changes subsequently for any reason, the Aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority to make necessary alteration in his record in the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations. (3) On receipt of any request under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the Authority may, if it is satisfied, make such alteration as may be required in the record relating to such Aadhaar number holder and intimate such alteration to the concerned Aadhaar number holder. (4) No identity information in the Central Identities Data Repository shall be altered except in the manner provided in this Act or regulations made in this behalf.
