DOCUMENT_ID: ACT004

TITLE: Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Act

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Parliament of India

SOURCE: Indian-Laws Dataset

DESCRIPTION:
Indian legislation containing 25 legal sections.






DOMAIN: Administrative and Regulatory Law

SUBDOMAIN: Government Regulation

SOURCE_TYPE: Legislative Legal Text

KEYWORDS: academy, scientific, innovative, research, administrative and regulatory law, government regulation

CONTENT:

SECTION: 1

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011. (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir*. (3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.

SECTION: 10

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 10. Authorities of Academy.- The following shall be the authorities of the Academy, namely:- (a) The Board; (b) Senate; (c) Director; (d) Boards of Studies; (e) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Academy.

SECTION: 11

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 11. Composition of Board of Governors.- (1) The Board referred to in clause (a) of section 10 shall consist of the following, namely:- (a) the Chairperson of the Board, to be appointed under section 12; (b) the Director-General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, ex officio vice-chairperson; (c) the President of the Indian National Science Academy, ex officio member; (d) the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, Government of India, ex officio member; (e) the Chairman, Space Commission, Government of India, ex officio member; (f) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, Government of India, ex officio member; (g) the Finance Secretary in the Ministry of finance Government of India, ex officio member; (h) the heads of three premier institutions in the field of imparting education in Science and Technology, members to be nominated under section 13; (i) four distinguished scientists or academicians of global eminence, of which two should be from reputed institutions outside India, members to be nominated under section 13; (j) three eminent industrialists or technologists, members to be nominated under section 13; (k) four distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists or Directors of laboratories of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, members to be nominated under section 14; (l) the Director of the Academy, ex officio member. (2) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Board. (3) The Board may evolve its own procedure for the purpose of conducting its meetings and transacting business therein. (4) The Associate Director in charge of administration of the Academy shall be the Secretary of the Board.

SECTION: 12

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 12. Appointment of Chairperson.- (1) The Chairperson shall be appointed by the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, on the recommendation of the selection committee constituted under sub-section (2): Provided that the Director-General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, being the ex officio Vice-Chairperson , as referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 11, shall act as the Chairperson until the first Chairperson is selected and appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act: Provided further that no person shall be selected and appointed as Chairperson unless such person is an Indian citizen. (2) The selection committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist of four eminent scientists or technologists of international repute, as may be nominated by the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. (3) At least two eminent scientists or technologists of international repute nominated under subsection (2) shall be from the heads of international societies, academies, or similar organisations in the field of science and technology. (4) The selection committee referred to in sub-section (2) shall- (a) be constituted within six months before the completion of tenure of the incumbent as the Chairperson of the Board; (b) submit its recommendation at least three months before the completion of the tenure of the incumbent Chairperson. (5) The selection committee may evolve its own procedure for the purposes of meetings and making recommendations under sub-section (1) including making recommendations in respect of a person who has not applied for the post of Chairperson. (6) Three members of the selection committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall form quorum for the meeting of the committee. (7) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes.

SECTION: 13

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 13. Nomination of distinguished scientists or academicians of global eminence, eminent industrialists or technologists and heads of three premier institutions in the field of imparting education in science and technology.- The heads of three premier institutions in the field of imparting education in science and technology, referred to in clause (h), the distinguished scientists or academicians of global eminence referred to in clause (i), and eminent industrialists or technologists referred to in clause (j), of sub-section (1) of section 11, shall be nominated, by the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research.

SECTION: 14

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 14. Nomination of distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or Directors of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories.- The nomination of distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or Directors of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories, referred to in clause (k) of sub-section (1) of section 11 shall be made by the Governing Body of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research.

SECTION: 15

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 15. Allowances payable to members of Board.- The members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, if any, from the Academy, as may be provided for, in the Statutes but no member other than the Director of the Academy referred to in clause (l) of sub-section (1) of section 11, shall be entitled to any salary by reason of this section.

SECTION: 16

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 16. Term of office of members of Board.- (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, term of office of the Chairperson or any other nominated member of the Board shall be four years, being one term of the Board and they shall not be eligible to be re-appointed as Chair person or nominated as a member, as the case may be. Explanation I.- The period of term of office of the Chairperson or any other nominated member of the Board [other than ex officio Vice-Chairperson and ex officio members and nominated members under clause (k) of sub-section (1) of section 11] of the existing Academy shall be counted for the purposes of this sub-section. Explanation II.- For the removal of doubt it is hereby declared that a person who held the office of a member shall not be eligible to be re-appointed as a member but may be appointed as the Chairperson in accordance with the provisions of this Act: Provided that an outgoing member of the Board shall, unless or otherwise directed, continue in office until another person is appointed, or, as the case may be, nominated as a member in his place. (2) In the event of vacancy in the office of the Chairperson, by reason of his death or resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairperson shall act as the Chairperson until a new Chairperson is appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and enter upon his office: Provided that a person appointed due to a vacancy in the office of Chairperson under sub-section (2), shall be eligible to be appointed as Chairperson in accordance with the provisions of this Act only for one term in addition to the period for which he was appointed to fill the vacancy of Chairperson. (3) In the event of vacancy in the office of a nominated member under clauses (h), (i), (j) and (k) of sub-section (1) of section 11 by reason of his death or resignation or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this Act: Provided that a person nominated under sub-section (1) of section 11 due to a vacancy in the office of the member, such person shall be eligible to be nominated only for one term as member in accordance with the provisions of this Act, in addition to the period for which he was nominated to fill the vacancy. (4) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue as long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member. (5) One-fourth of the members, being distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists or Directors of laboratories of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research nominated under clause (k) of sub-section (1) of section 11 shall retire every year and new members shall be nominated in their place in accordance with the provisions of this Act: Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-section, the members, being distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or Directors of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories nominated under clause (k) of sub-section (1) of section 11, immediately after the commencement of this Act for the first time, may hold office for such period, as may be specified in their nomination and provisions of this sub-section shall not be applicable to such nominated members.

SECTION: 17

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 17. Powers of Board.- (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Academy and shall exercise all the powers of the Academy not otherwise provided for by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power to review the acts of the Senate. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board shall have the powers to- (a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration and working of the Academy; (b) institute courses of study at the Academy; (c) make Statutes; (d) institute and appoint persons to academic as well as other posts in the Academy; (e) consider and modify or cancel or rescind Ordinances; (f) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts and the budget estimates of the Academy for the next financial year, together with a statement of its development plans; (g) approve investments in infrastructure of the Academy in any land or building; (h) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by this Act or the Statutes. (3) The Board shall also have the power to appoint such committees of one or more persons as it considers necessary for exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties and hold enquiries under this Act.

SECTION: 18

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 18. Senate.- (1) The Senate shall consist of the following, namely:- (a) the Director, ex officio, who shall be the Chairperson of the Senate; (b) all Associate Directors, ex officio members; (c) all Deans of the Academy, ex officio members; (d) two Professors from each area of study represented by the Boards of Studies of the Academy, as may be nominated by the Board, ex officio members; (e) two scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, who being the youngest in age; and recipient of Shanti Swaroop Bhatnagar Award; and who are also Faculty of the Academy, as may be nominated by the Director-General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research; (f) two scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, who being the youngest in age; and recipient of CSIR-Young Scientist Award; and who are Faculty of the Academy, as may be nominated by the Director-General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research; (g) three Directors or distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories, nominated by its Director-General; (h) three persons, not being the employees of the Academy or the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, to be nominated by the Chancellor in consultation with the Director from amongst educationists of repute, one being from each of the fields of science, engineering and social sciences; (i) such other members of the staff as may be laid down in the Statutes. (2) The tenure of the nominated members under clauses (d) to (h) of sub-section (1) shall be two years: Provided that the Senate shall not, at any time, have less than fifty per cent. of its members from the Councilof Scientific and Industrial Research scientists teaching in the Academy.

SECTION: 19

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 19. Powers of Senate.- Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Senate of the Academy shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the maintenance, of standards of instruction, education and examinations in the Academy and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes and Ordinances.

SECTION: 2

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 2. Definitions.- In this Act, and in all Statutes and Ordinances made thereunder, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Academy" means the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research established under subsection (1) of section 3; (b) "Board" means the Board of Governors of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research referred to in section 10; (c) "Council of Scientific and Industrial Research" means a society registered by the name of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860); (d) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under section 12; (e) "Chancellor" means the Chancellor of the Academy referred to in section 20; (f) "Director" means the Director of the Academy appointed under section 22; (g) "distinguished scientists" or "outstanding scientists" of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research means scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research designated as such; (h) "existing Academy" means the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research established in pursuance of the Resolution of the Government of India in the Ministry of Science and Technology, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, vide No. 6/1/CSIR-Ac SIR/2010-PPD, dated the 1st July, 2010; (i) "Faculty of the Academy" means Academy Professors, Professors of Eminence, Distinguished Professors, Outstanding Professors, Senior Professors, Emeritus Professors, Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors, visiting faculty, and such other persons as may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the Academy or institutions maintained by the Academy and includes the scientists of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research assigned for imparting instruction or conducting research; (j) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; (k) "Statutes and Ordinances" means the Statutes and the Ordinances of the Academy for the time being in force. 1. 3rd April, 2012 [except sub-section (2) of section 5], vide notification No. S.O. 709(E), dated 2nd April, 2012, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 26th June, 2013 [sub-sec. (2) of section 5], vide notification No. S.O. 1850(E), dated 26th June, 2013, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). *. Vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.

SECTION: 20

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 20. Chancellor of Academy.- (1) The Chairperson of the Board shall be the Chancellor of the Academy. (2) The Chancellor shall ordinarily preside at the Convocations of the Academy.

SECTION: 21

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 21. Director of Academy.- The Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the Academy and shall be responsible for the administration of the Academy and imparting instruction, research and maintenance of discipline.

SECTION: 22

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 22. Appointment and duty of Director of Academy, etc.- (1) The Director shall be appointed, by the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, on the recommendation of the selection committee constituted under sub-section (2). (2) The selection committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist of- (a)the Chairperson of the Board; (b) the Vice-Chairperson of the Board; (c) the President of the Indian National Science Academy; (d) the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, Government of India; (e) the Chairman, Space Commission, Government of India. (3) The selection committee referred to in sub-section (2) shall- (a) be constituted within six months before the completion of tenure of the incumbent as the Director; (b) submit its recommendation at least three months before the completion of the tenure of the incumbent Director. (4) The selection committee may evolve its own procedure for the purposes of meetings and making recommendations under sub-section (1) including making recommendations in respect of a person who has not applied for the post of Director. (5) Three members of the selection committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall form quorum for the meeting of the committee: Provided that no person shall be selected or nominated as Director unless such person is an Indian citizen. (6) It shall be the duty of the Director that the decisions taken by the Board are implemented. (7) The Director shall submit an annual report and accounts of the Academy to the Board. (8) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances. (9) The term of the Director shall be five years.

SECTION: 23

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 23. Associate Directors.- (1) The Associate Directors of the Academy shall, be appointed by the Director with the approval of the Board, from amongst Professors of the Academy or scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engaged in academic activity in the Academy, for such period, and on such terms and conditions, as may be laid down by the Statutes, and, shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to them by this Act or the Statutes or by the Director. (2) The Board may assign any other designation for the Associate Directors, for the purpose of administrative convenience or academic efficiency.

SECTION: 24

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 24. Powers of other authorities.- (1) The constitution and powers of Board of Studies shall be such as may be provided in the Statutes. (2) The powers, including the financial powers and duties of authorities, officers and other functionaries of the Academy shall be as provided by the Statutes.

SECTION: 25

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 25. Funds of Academy.- (1) The Academy shall maintain and retain a fund to which shall be credited- (a) all fees (including tuition fees) and other charges received by the Academy; (b) all monies received by the Academy by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers; (c) monies for projects undertaken by the Academy; (d) income from investment made by the Academy or from any other source; (e) the funds received from the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, by way of loan or otherwise; (f) all monies received by the Academy in any other manner or from any other source. (2) All monies credited to the fund of the Academy shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as the Academy may, with the approval of the Board, decide. (3) The fund shall be applied for meeting,- (a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson, members of the Board or Faculty, officers and other employees or members of the committees set up by the Academy; (b) the expenses of the Academy in the discharge of its functions or exercise of its powers under section 8; (c) the expenses on objects of, and for purposes authorised by, this Act. (4) All expenditure of the Academy shall be within the framework of a budget approved by the Board.

SECTION: 26

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 26. Accounts.- (1) The Academy shall maintain proper and separate accounts giving therein the details of all receipts in, and, expenditure from, such fund and other relevant particulars. (2) The accounts referred to in sub-section (1) shall be prepared and got audited before the expiry of six months from the end of each financial year. (3) The Academy shall submit to the Board and the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, the accounts referred to in sub-section (1) duly audited under section 27 and signed by the Director, Associate Director in charge of Finance and Associate Director in charge of Administration. (4) The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research referred to in sub-section (3), the Board and any other person appointed by them in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Academy shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Academy.

SECTION: 27

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 27. Audit of accounts and its publication.- (1) The accounts of the Academy shall, without prejudice to the provisions contained in the Comptroller and Auditor-Generals (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (56 of 1971), be audited by auditors who may be appointed by the Board for the term of one year and such auditors shall be eligible for re-appointment. (2) No person shall be eligible to be appointed as an auditor under sub-section (1) unless he is a chartered accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949), and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act. (3) The accounts of the Academy shall, after the completion of the audit under sub-section (1) and submission thereof to the Board and the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research be published on the website of the Academy.

SECTION: 28

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 28. Statutes.- (1) The Statutes of the Academy shall be enacted by the Board. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the Senate may make recommendations for enactment of Statutes to the Board. (3) The Board may, from time to time, make new Statutes or may amend or repeal or rescind the Statutes with effect from such date as it may direct.

SECTION: 29

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 29. Matters to be provided by Statutes.- Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the matters considered necessary by the Board for functioning of the Academy within the framework of this Act, including the following matters, namely:- (a) the conferment of degrees and diplomas; (b) the constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies; (c) the tuition fee and other fees to be charged; (d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes; (e) the term of office and the method of appointment of officers of the Academy; (f) the qualification of Faculty of the Academy (other than the scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engaged in the service of the Academy), officers and other staff of Academy: Provided that the scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engaged in the service of the Academy shall be governed by the qualifications specified by the Council and nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to disqualify them from undertaking the service of the Academy or engaging them as Faculty of the Academy; (g) the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the terms and conditions of service of Faculty, officers and other staff of the Academy; (h) the provision of insurance fund, provident fund and other retirement benefits, for the benefit of the Faculty, officers and other staff of the Academy; (i) the constitution, powers and duties of authorities of the Academy; (j) the establishment and maintenance of hostels; (k) the conditions of residence of students of the Academy and the levying of fees for residence in the hostels and of other charges; (l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and other members of the Board and any committee constituted by the Academy; (m) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any committee, the quorum at such meetings and the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business; (n) any other matter which may be required or necessary for the purposes of this Act.

SECTION: 3

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 3. Establishment of Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research.- (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act an Academy to be called the "Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research" a body corporate by such name. (2) The headquarters of the Academy shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by notification, specify. (3) The Academy may have such number of regional centres and campuses, as it may deem fit. (4) The Academy shall have perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall by that name, sue and be sued.

SECTION: 30

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 30. Ordinances.- (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of the Academy may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the admission of the students; (b) the courses of study; (c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted and shall be eligible for degrees, diplomas and certificates and to the examinations of the Academy, and shall be eligible for the degrees, diplomas and certificates; (d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes; (e) the condition and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators; (f) the conduct of examinations; (g) the maintenance of discipline among students of the Academy; (h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statute, is to be, or, may be, provided for by the Ordinances. (2) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be made by the Senate. (3) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have the effect from such date as it may direct, but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered by the Board in its subsequent meeting. (4) The Board shall have the power by resolution to modify or cancel or rescind any of the Ordinances and such Ordinances shall, from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled or rescinded, as the case may be.

SECTION: 31

The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 2011 31. Review of functioning of Academy.- (1) There shall be a review of the functioning of the Academy once in every four years by persons of eminence to be appointed by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. (2) The Academy shall meet the expenses for conducting the review under sub-section (1) and upon receipt of the report of such review, the Board may take appropriate action. (3) In addition to the review under sub-section (1), the Board may conduct review of functioning of administrative and academic wings of the Academy, in such manner and at such intervals, as may be provided in the Statutes.
