DOCUMENT_ID: ACT011

TITLE: Administrators General Act, 1963

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Act

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Parliament of India

SOURCE: Indian-Laws Dataset

DESCRIPTION:
Indian legislation containing 25 legal sections.






DOMAIN: Administrative and Regulatory Law

SUBDOMAIN: Government Regulation

SOURCE_TYPE: Legislative Legal Text

KEYWORDS: administrators, general, administrative and regulatory law, government regulation

CONTENT:

SECTION: 1

1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Administrators-GeneralAct, 1963. (2) It extends to the whole of India 1***. (3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

SECTION: 10

10. Power of Administrator-General to collect and hold assets where immediate action is required.- Whenever any person has died leaving assets within any State exceeding rupees 1[ten lakhs] in value, and the High Court for that State is satisfied that there is imminent danger of misappropriation, deterioration or waste of such assets, requiring immediate action, the High Court may, upon the application of the Administrator-General or of any person interested in such assets or in the due administration thereof, forthwith direct the Administrator-General- (a) to collect and take possession of such assets, and (b) to hold, deposit, realise, sell or invest the same according to the directions of the High Court, and, in default of any such directions, according to the provisions of this Act so far as the same are applicable to such assets. (2) Any order of the High Court under sub-section (1) shall entitle the Administrator-General-(a) to maintain any suit or proceeding for the recovery of such assets; (b) if he thinks fit, to apply for letters of administration of the estate of such deceased person; (c) to retain out of the assets of the estate any fees chargeable under rules made under this Act; and (d) to reimburse himself for all payments made by him in respect of such assets which a private administrator might lawfully have made.

SECTION: 11

11. Grant of probate or letters of administration to person appearing in the course of proceedings taken by Administrator-General.- If, in the course of proceedings to obtain letters of administration under the provisions of section 9 or section 10,- (a) any person appears and establishes his claim- (i) to probate of the will of the deceased; or (ii) to letters of administration as next-of-kin of the deceased, and gives such security as may be required of him by law; or (b) any person satisfies the High Court that he has taken and is prosecuting with due diligence other proceedings for the protection of the estate, the case being one in which the obtaining of such probate or letters of administration is not obligatory under the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925); or (c) the High Court is satisfied that there is no apprehension of misappropriation, deterioration, or waste of the assets and that the grant of letters of administration in such proceedings is not otherwise necessary for the protection of the assets, the High Court shall- (1) in the case mentioned in clause (a), grant probate of the will or letters of administration accordingly; (2) in the case mentioned in clause (b) or clause (c), drop the proceedings; and (3) in all the cases award to the Administrator-General the costs of any proceedings taken by him under those sections to be paid out of the estate as part of the testamentary or interstate expenses thereof.

SECTION: 12

12. Grant of administration to Administrator-General in certain cases.- If, in the course of proceedings to obtain letters of administration under the provisions of section 9 or section 10, and within such period as to the High Court seems reasonable, no person appears and establishes his claim to probate of a will, or to a grant of letters of administration as next-of-kin of the deceased, or satisfies the High Court that he has taken and is prosecuting with due diligence other proceedings for the protection of the estate, the case being one in which the obtaining of such probate or letters of administration is not obligatory under the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), and the High Court is satisfied that there is apprehension of misappropriation, deterioration, or waste of the assets or that the grant of letters of administration in such proceedings is other wise necessary for the protection of the assets; or if a person who has established his claim to a grant of letters of administration as next-of-kin of the deceased fails to give such security as may be required of him by law; the High Court may grant letters of administration to the Administrator-General. 1.Subs. by Act 33 of 2012, s. 2, for "two lakhs" (w.e.f. 1-7-2012).

SECTION: 13

13. Administrator-General not precluded from applying for letters within one month afterdeath.- Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to preclude the Administrator-General from applying to the High Court for letters of administration in any case within the period of one month from the death of the deceased.

SECTION: 14

14. Recall of Administrator-General's administration and grant of probate, etc., to executor or next-of-kin.- If an executor or next-of-kin of the deceased, who has not been personally served with a citation or who has not had notice thereof in time to appear pursuant thereto, establishes to the satisfaction of the High Court a claim to probate of will or to letters of administration in preference to theAdministrator-General, any letters of administration granted in accordance with the provisions of this Act to the Administrator-General- (a) shall be revoked, if a will of the deceased is proved in the State; (b) may be revoked, in other cases, if an application for that purpose is made within six months after the grant to the Administrator-General and the High Court is satisfied that there has been no unreasonable delay in making the application, or in transmitting the authority under which the application is made; and probate or letters of administration may be granted to such executor or next-of-kin, as the case may be.

SECTION: 15

15. Cost of obtaining administration, etc., may, on revocation, be ordered to be paid toAdministrator-General out of estate.- If any letters of administration granted to theAdministrator-General in accordance with the provisions of this Act are revoked, the High Court may order the costs of obtaining such letters of administration, and the whole or any part of any fees which would otherwise have been payable under this Act, together with the costs of the Administrator-General in any proceedings taken to obtain such revocation, to be paid to or retained by the Administrator-General out of the estate: Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (2) of section 10.

SECTION: 16

16. After revocation letters granted to Administrator-General to be deemed, as to him, to have been voidable only.- If any letters of administration granted to the Administrator-General in accordance with the provisions of this Act are revoked, the same shall, so far as regards theAdministrator-General and all persons acting under his authority in pursuance thereof, be deemed to have been only voidable, except as to any act done by any such Administrator-General or other person as aforesaid, after notice of a will or of any other fact which would render such letters void: Provided that no notice of a will or of any other fact which would render any such letters void shall affect the Administrator-General or any person acting under his authority in pursuance of such letters unless, within the period of one month from the time of giving such notice, proceedings are commenced to prove the will, or to cause the letters to be revoked, and such proceedings are prosecuted without unreasonable delay.

SECTION: 17

17. Payments made by Administrator-General prior to revocation.- If any letters of administration granted to the Administrator-General in accordance with the provisions of this Act are revoked, upon the grant of probate of a will, or upon the grant of letters of administration with a copy of the will annexed, all payments made or acts done by or under the authority of the Administrator-General in pursuance of such letters of administration, prior to the revocation, which would have been valid under any letters of administration lawfully granted to him with a copy of such will annexed, shall be deemed valid notwithstanding such revocation.

SECTION: 18

18.Administrator-General's petition for grant of letters of administration.- Whenever anyAdministrator-General applies for letters of administration in accordance with the provisions of this Act, it shall be sufficient if the petition required to be presented for the grant of such letters states,- (i) the time and place of the death of the deceased to the best of the knowledge and belief of the petitioner; (ii) the names and addresses of the surviving next-of-kin of the deceased, if known; (iii) the particulars and value of the assets likely to come into the hands of the petitioner; (iv) particulars of the liabilities of the estate, if known.

SECTION: 19

19. Name in which probate or letters to be granted.- All probates or letters of administration granted to any Administrator-General shall be granted to him by that name.

SECTION: 2

2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "assets" means all the property, movable and immovable, of a deceased person, which is chargeable with and applicable to the payment of his debts and legacies, or available for distribution among his heirs and next-of-kin; (b) "letters of administration" includes any letters of administration whether general or with a copy of the will annexed or limited in time or otherwise; (c) "next-of-kin" includes a widower or widow of a deceased person, or any other person who by law would be entitled to letters of administration in preference to a creditor or legatee of the deceased; and (d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

SECTION: 20

20. Effect of probate or letters granted to Administrator-General.- (1) Probate or letters of administration granted by the High Court to the Administrator-General of any State shall have effect over all the assets of the deceased throughout 1[India] and shall be conclusive as to the representative title against all debtors of the deceased and all persons holding such assets, and shall afford full indemnity to all debtors paying their debts and all persons delivering up such assets to such Administrator-General. (2) Whenever a grant of probate or letters of administration is made by a High Court to theAdministrator-General, the High Court shall send to the High Courts for the other States a certificate that such grant has been made, and such certificate shall be filed by the High Court receiving the same. 2[(3) Any probate or letters of administration granted by the High Court for the State of Jammu and Kashmir* before the commencement of the Central Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1968 shall, after such commencement, be as effective as if such probate or letters of administration had been granted under this section.]

SECTION: 21

21.[Effect of grant by the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir.] Omitted by the Central Laws(Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act 1968 (25 of 1968), s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15-8-1968).

SECTION: 22

22. Transfer by private executor or administrator of interest under probate or letters.- (1)Any private executor or administrator may, with the previous consent of the Administrator-General of the State in which any of the assets of the estate, in respect of which such executor or administrator has obtained probate or letters of administration, are situate, by an instrument in writing under his hand notified in the Official Gazette, transfer the assets of the estate, vested in him by virtue of such probate or letters to the Administrator-General by that name or any other sufficient description. (2) As from the date of such transfer, the transferor shall be exempt from all liability as such executor or administrator, as the case may be, except in respect of acts done before the date of such transfer, and the Administrator-General shall have the rights which he would have had, and be subject to the liabilities to which he would have been subject, if the probate or letters of administration, as the case may be, had been granted to him by that name at the date of such transfer.

SECTION: 23

23. Distribution of assets.- (1) When the Administrator-General has given the prescribed notice to creditors and others to send in to him their claims against the estate of the deceased, he shall, at the expiration of the time therein named for sending in claims, be at liberty to distribute the assets or any part thereof in discharge of such lawful claims as he has notice of. (2) The Administrator-General shall not be liable for the assets so distributed to any person of whose claims he had no notice at the time of such distribution. (3) No notice of any claim which has been sent in and has been rejected or disallowed in part by theAdministrator-General shall affect him, unless proceedings to enforce such claim are commenced within one month after notice of the rejection or disallowance of such claim has been given in the prescribed manner and unless such proceedings are prosecuted without unreasonable delay. (4) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any creditor or other claimant to follow the assets or any part thereof in the hands of the persons who may have received the same respectively. (5) In computing the period of limitation for any suit, appeal or application under the provisions of any law for the time being in force, the period between the date of submission of the claim of a creditor or other claimant to the Administrator-General and the date of the final decision of the Administrator-Generalon such claim shall be excluded. 1.Subs. by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and the Schedule, for "the territories to which this Act extends" (w.e.f. 15-8-1968). 2.Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-8-1968). *. Vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.

SECTION: 24

24. Appointment of Official Trustee as trustee of assets after completion of administration.- (1) When the Administrator-General has, so far as may be, discharged all the liabilities of an estate administered by him, he shall notify the fact in the Official Gazette, and he may, by an instrument in writing, with the consent of the Official Trustee and subject to any rules made by the State Government, appoint the Official Trustee to be the trustee of any assets then remaining in his hands. (2) Upon such appointment, such assets shall vest in the Official Trustee as if he had been appointed trustee in accordance with the provisions of the Official Trustees Act, 1913 (2 of 1913), and shall be held by him upon the same trusts as the same were held immediately before such appointment.

SECTION: 25

25. Power of High Court to give directions regarding administration of estate.- The High Court may, on application made to it by the Administrator-General or any person interested in the assets or in the due administration thereof, give to the Administrator-General of the State any general or special directions as to any estate in his charge or in regard to the administration of any such estate.

SECTION: 26

26. No security to be required from Administrator-General.- No Administrator-General shall be required by any Court to enter into any administration bond, or to give other security to the Court, on the grant of any letters of administration to him by that name.

SECTION: 27

27. Manner in which petition to be verified by Administrator-General.- NoAdministrator-General shall be required to verify, otherwise than by his signature, any petition presented by him under the provisions of this Act, and, if the facts stated in any such petition are not within his own personal knowledge, the petition may be subscribed and verified by any person competent to make verification.

SECTION: 28

28. Entry of Administrator-General not to constitute notice of a trust.- The entry of theAdministrator-General by that name in the books of a company shall not constitute notice of a trust, and a company shall not be entitled to object to entering the name of the Administrator-General on its register by reason only that the Administrator-General is a corporation, and in dealing with assets the fact that the person dealt with is the Administrator-General shall not of itself constitute notice of a trust.

SECTION: 29

29. In what cases Administrator-General may grant certificate.- (1) Whenever any person has died leaving assets within any State and the Administrator-General of such State is satisfied that such assets, excluding any sum of money deposited in a Government Savings Bank or in any provident fund to which the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), apply, did not at the date of death exceed in the whole 1[ten lakhs] rupees in value, he may grant to any person, claiming otherwise than as a creditor to be interested in such assets or in the due administration thereof, a certificate under his hand entitling the claimant to receive the assets therein mentioned left by the deceased within the State, to a value not exceeding in the whole 1[ten lakhs] rupees. (2) No certificate under this section shall be granted before the lapse of one month from the death unless before the lapse of the said one month the Administrator-General is requested so to do by writing under the hand of the executor or the widow or other person entitled to administer the estate of the deceased and he thinks fit to grant it. (3) No certificate shall be granted under this section,- (i) where probate of the deceased's will or letters of administration of his estate has or have been granted; or (ii) in respect of any sum of money deposited in a Government Savings Bank or in any provident fund to which the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), apply. 1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2012, s. 2, for "two lakhs" (w.e.f. 1-7-2012).

SECTION: 3

3. Appointment of Administrator-General.- (1) The State Government shall appoint anAdministrator-General for the State: Provided that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar the appointment of the same person asAdministrator-General for two or more States. (2) No person shall be appointed to the office of Administrator-General unless he has been for at least- (a) seven years an advocate; or (b) seven years an attorney of a High Court; or (c) ten years a member of the judicial service of a State; or (d) five years a Deputy Administrator-General.

SECTION: 30

30.Grant of certificate to creditors and power to take charge of certain estates.- (1) If, in cases falling within section 29, no person claiming to be interested otherwise than as a creditor in such assets or in the due administration thereof obtains, within three months of the death of the deceased, a certificate from the Administrator-General under that section, or probate of a will or letters of administration of the estate of the deceased, the Administrator-General may administer the estate without letters of administration, in the same manner as if such letters had been granted to him. (2) If the Administrator-General neglects or refuses to administer such estate, he shall, upon the application of a creditor, grant a certificate to him in the same manner as if he were interested in such assets otherwise than as a creditor; and such certificate shall have the same effect as a certificate granted under the provisions of section 29, and shall be subject to all the provisions of this Act which are applicable to such certificate. (3) The Administrator-General may, if he thinks fit, before granting a certificate under sub-section (2), require the creditor to give reasonable security for the due administration of the estate of the deceased.

SECTION: 31

31. Administrator-General not bound to grant certificate unless satisfied of claimant's title,etc.- The Administrator-General shall not be bound to grant any certificate under section 29 or section 30 unless he is satisfied after making such inquiry as he thinks fit of the title of the claimant and of the value of the assets left by the deceased within the State.
