DOCUMENT_ID: ACT010

TITLE: Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Act

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Parliament of India

SOURCE: Indian-Laws Dataset

DESCRIPTION:
Indian legislation containing 25 legal sections.






DOMAIN: Administrative and Regulatory Law

SUBDOMAIN: Government Regulation

SOURCE_TYPE: Legislative Legal Text

KEYWORDS: administrative, tribunals, administrative and regulatory law, government regulation

CONTENT:

SECTION: 1

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 1. Short Title, Extent and Commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. (2) It extends, - (a) in so far as it relates to the Central Administrative Tribunal, to the whole of India ; (b) in so far as it relates to the Administrative Tribunals for States, to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. (3) The provisions of this Act, in so far as they relate to the Central Administrative Tribunal, shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint. (4) The provisions of the Act, in so far as they relate to Administrative Tribunal, for a State shall come into force in State on such date as the Central Government may, by notification appoint.

SECTION: 10

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 10. Salaries and Allowances and Other Terms and Conditions of Service of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Other Members. - The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government : Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

SECTION: 11

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 11. Provision as to the Holding of Offices by Chairman, on Ceasing to be Such Chairman, Etc. - On ceasing to hold office, - (a) the Chairman of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall be ineligible for further employment under the Government of India or under the Government of a State; (b) the Chairman of a State Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or Vice-Chairman or any other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal or as the Chairman of any other State Administrative Tribunal or Joint Administrative Tribunal, but not for any other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State; (c) the Vice-Chairman of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall, subject to the other provision of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman of that Tribunal or as the Chairman or Vice-Chairman of any State Administrative Tribunal or Joint Administrative Tribunal but not for any other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State; (d) the Vice-Chairman of a State Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman of that Tribunal or as the Chairman or Vice-Chairman of the Central Administrative Tribunal or of any other State Administrative Tribunal or Joint Administrative Tribunal but not for any other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State; (e) a Member (other than the Chairman or Vice-Chairman) of any Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or Vice-Chairman of such Tribunal or as the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member of any other Tribunal, but not for any other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State; (f) the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall not appear, act or plead before any Tribunal of which he was the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member. Explanation: For the purposes of this section, employment under the Government of India or under the Government of a State includes employment under any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or under any corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government.

SECTION: 12

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 12. Financial and Administrative Power of the Chairman. - The Chairman shall exercise such financial and administrative power over the Benches as may be vested in him under the rules made by the appropriate Government: Provided that the Chairman shall have authority to delegate such of his financial and administrative powers as he may think fir to the Vice-Chairman or any officer of the Tribunal, subject to the conditions that the Vice-Chairman or such officer shall, while exercising such delegated powers, continue to act under the direction, control and supervision of the Chairman.

SECTION: 13

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 13. Staff of the Tribunal. - (1) The appropriate Government shall determine the nature and categories of the officers and other employees required to assist a Tribunal in the discharge of its functions and provide the Tribunal with such officers and other employees as it may think fit. (1-A) The officers and other employees of a Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the Chairman. (2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of a Tribunal shall be such as may be specified by rules made by the appropriate Government.

SECTION: 14

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 14. Jurisdiction, Powers and Authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal. - (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all courts (except the Supreme Court) in relation to - (a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any All-India Service or to any civil service of the Union or a civil post under the Union or to a Post connected with defense or in the defense services, being, in either case, a post filed by a civilian; (b) all service matters concerning - (i) a member of any All-India Service; or (ii) a person [not being a member of an All-India Service or a person referred to in clause (c) appointed to any civil service of the Union or any civil post under the Union; or (iii) a civilian [not being a member of an All-India Service or a person referred to in clause (c) appointed to any defense services or a post connected with defense, and pertaining to the service of such member, person or civilian, in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government; (c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the affairs of the Union concerning a person appointed to any service or post referred to in sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii) of clause (b), being a person whose services have been placed by a State Government or any local or other authority or any corporation or society or other body, at the disposal of the Central Government for such appointment. Explanation: (1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that references to "Union" in this sub-section shall be construed as including references also to a Union Territory. (2) The Central Government may, by notification apply with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification the provisions of sub-section (3) to local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India and to corporations or society owned or controlled by Government, not being a local or other authority or corporation or society controlled or owned by a State Government: Provided that if the Central Government considers it expedient so to do for the purpose of facilitating transition to the scheme as envisaged by this Act, different dates may be so specified under this sub-section in respect of different classes of, or different categories under any class of local or other authorities or corporations. (3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall also exercise, on and from the date with effect from which the provisions of this sub-section apply to any local or other authority or corporation or society, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that date by all courts (except the Supreme Court in relation to (a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or other authority or corporation or society; and (b) all service matters concerning a person [other than a person referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) appointed to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or other authority or corporation or society and pertaining to the service of such person in connection with such affairs.

SECTION: 15

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 15. Jurisdiction, Powers and Authority of State Administrative Tribunals. - (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, Administrative Tribunal for a State shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all courts (except the Supreme Court in relation to - (a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any civil service of the State or to any civil post under the State; (b) all service matters concerning a person [not being a person referred to in clause (c) of this sub-section or a member, person or civilian referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 14] appointed to any civil service of the State or any civil post under the State and pertaining to the service of such person in connection with the affairs of the State or of any local or other authority under the control of the State Government or of any corporation or society owned or controlled by the State Government;(c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the affairs of the State concerning a person appointed to any service or post referred to in clause (b), being a person whose services have been placed by any such local or other authority or corporation or society or other body as is controlled or owned by the State Government at the disposal of the State Government for such appointment. (2) The State Government may, by notification, apply with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification the provisions of sub-section (3) to local or other authorities and corporations or societies controlled or owned by the State Government : Provided that if the State Government considers it expedient so to do for the purpose of facilitating transition to the scheme as envisaged by this Act, different dates may be so specified under this sub-section in respect of different classes of, or different categories under any class of local or other authorities or corporations or societies. (3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Administrative Tribunal for a State shall also exercise, on and from the date with effect from which the provisions of this sub-section apply to any local or other authority or corporation, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that date by all courts (except the Supreme Court in relation to - (a) recruitment, and matters to recruitment, to any concerning service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or other authority or corporation or society; and (b) all service matters concerning a person [other than a person referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of this section or a member, person or civilian referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 14] appointed to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or other authority or corporation or society and pertaining to the service of such person in connection with such affairs. (4) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Administrative Tribunal for a State shall not extend to or be exercisable in relation to, any matter in relation to which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal extends or is exercisable.

SECTION: 16

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 16. Jurisdiction, Powers and Authority of a Joint Administrative Tribunal. - A Joint Administrative Tribunal for two or more States shall exercise all the jurisdiction, powers and authority, exercisable by the Administrative Tribunals for such States.

SECTION: 17

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 17. Power to Punish for Contempt. - A Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction, powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has and may exercise and, for this purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of Court Act, 1971 (70 of 1971), shall have effect subject to the modifications that - (a) the references therein to a High Court shall be construed as including a reference to such Tribunal; (b) the references to the Advocate-General in section 15 of the said Act shall be construed, - (i) in relation to the Central Administrative Tribunal, as a reference to the Attorney-General or the Solicitor-General or the Additional Solicitor-General; and (ii) in relation to an Administrative Tribunal for a State or a Joint Administrative Tribunal for two or more States, as a reference to the Advocate-General of the State or any of the States for which such Tribunal has been established.

SECTION: 18

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 18. Distribution of Business amongst the Benches. - (1) When any Benches of a Tribunal are constituted the appropriate Government may from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution of the business of the Tribunal amongst the Benches and specify the matters which may be dealt with by each Bench. (2) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the purview of the business allocated to a Bench of a Tribunal, the decision of the Chairman thereon shall be final. Explanation : For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression "matters" includes applications under section 19.

SECTION: 19

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 19. Applications to Tribunals. - (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of a Tribunal may make an application to the Tribunal for the redressal of his grievance. Explanation : (a) by the Government or a local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or by any corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government; or (b) by an officer, committee or other body or agency of the Government or a local or other authority or corporation or society referred to in clause (a). (2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and be accompanied by such documents or other evidence and by such fee (if any, not exceeding one hundred rupees) in respect of the filing of such application and by such other fees for the service or execution of processes, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. (3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Tribunal shall, if satisfied after such inquiry as it may deem necessary, that the application is a fit case for adjudication or trial by it, admit such application; but where the Tribunal is not so satisfied, it may summarily reject the application after recording its reasons. (4) Where an application has been admitted by a Tribunal under sub-section (3), every proceeding under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances in relation to the subject-matter of such application pending immediately before such admission shall abate and save as otherwise direct by the Tribunal, no appeal or representation in relation to such matter shall thereafter be entertained under such rules. Comments: It is settled law that the Tribunal has only power of judicial review of the administrative action of the appellant on complaints relating to service conditions of employees. It is the exclusive domain of the disciplinary authority to consider the evidence on record and to record findings whether the charge has been proved or not. It is equally settled law that technical rules of evidence has no application for the disciplinary proceedings and the authority is to consider the material on record. In judicial review, it is settled law that the Court or the Tribunal has no power to trench on the jurisdiction to appreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own conclusion. State of T.N. v. S. Subramaniam, AIR 1996 SUPREME COURT 1232

SECTION: 2

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 2. Act not to Apply to Certain Persons. - The provisions of this Act shall not apply to - (a) any member of the naval, military or air force or of any other armed forces of the Union; (b) Omitted (c) any officer or servant of the Supreme Court or any High Court or Courts subordinate thereto; (d) any person appointed to the secretarial staff of either House of Parliament or to the secretarial staff of any State Legislature or a House thereof or, in the case of a Union territory having a Legislature, of that Legislature.

SECTION: 20

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 20. Application not to be Admitted Unless Other Remedies Exhausted. - (1) A Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances. (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances, - (a) if a final order has been made by Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order under such rules, rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made by such person in connection with the grievance; or (b) where no final order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order with regard to the appeal preferred or representation made by such person, if a period of six months from the date on which such appeal was preferred or representation was made has expired. (3) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (2), any remedy available to an applicant by way of submission of a memorial to the President or to the Governor of a State or to any other functionary shall not be deemed to be one of the remedies which are available unless the applicant had elected to submit such memorial.

SECTION: 21

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 21. Limitation. - (1) A Tribunal shall not admit an application, - (a) in a case where a final order such as is mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 20 has been made in connection with the grievance unless the application is made, within one year from the date on which such final order has been made; (b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 20 has been made and a period of six months had expired thereafter without such final order having been made, within one year from the date of expiry of the said period of six months. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where - (a) the grievance in respect of which an application is made had arisen by reason of any order made at any time during the period of three years immediately preceding the date on which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal becomes exercisable under this Act in respect of the matter to which such order relates; and (b) no proceedings for the redressal of such grievance had been commenced before the said date before any High Court, the application shall be entertained by the Tribunal if it is made within the period referred to in clause (a), or, as the case may be, clause (b), of sub-section (1) or within a period of six months from the said date, whichever period expires later. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), an application may be admitted after the period of one year specified in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, the period of six months specified in sub-section (2), if the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for not making the application within such period.

SECTION: 22

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 22. Procedure and Powers of Tribunals. - (1) A Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the Central Government, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of places and times of its inquiry and decided whether to sit in public or in private. (2) A tribunal shall decide every application made to it as expeditiously as possible and ordinarily every application shall be decided on a perusal of documents and written representations and after hearing such oral arguments as may be advanced. (3) A Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely : (a) Summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; (c) receiving evidence on affidavits; (d) subject to the provisions of section 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or document from any office; (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or, documents; (f) reviewing its decisions; (g) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte; (h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any order passed by it ex parte; and (i) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government.

SECTION: 23

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 23. Right of Applicant to take Assistance of Legal Practitioner and of Government, Etc., to Appoint Presenting Officers. - (1) A person making an application to a Tribunal under this Act may either appear in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner of his choice to present his case before the Tribunal. (2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local or other authority or corporation or society, to which the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 14 or sub-section (3) of section 15 apply, may authorize one or more legal practitioners or any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every person so authorized by it may present its case with respect to any application before a Tribunal.

SECTION: 24

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 24. Conditions as to Making of Interim Orders. - Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceedings relating to, an application unless - (a) copies of such application and of all documents in support of the plea for such interim order are furnished to the party against whom such application is made or proposed to be made; and (b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter: Provided that a Tribunal may dispense with the requirements of clauses (a) and (b) and make an interim orders as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied for reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the applicant which cannot be adequately compensated in money but any such interim order shall, if it is not sooner vacated cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fourteen days from the date on which it is made unless the said requirements have been complied with before the expiry of that period and the Tribunal has continued the operation of the interim order.

SECTION: 25

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 25. Power of Chairman to Transfer Cases from One Bench to Another. - On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench.

SECTION: 26

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 26. Decision by Majority. - If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the Chairman who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members of the Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members of the Tribunal who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.

SECTION: 27

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 27. Execution of Orders of a Tribunal. - Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, the order of a Tribunal finally disposing of an application or an appeal shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court (including a High Court) and such order shall be executed in the same manner in which any final order of the nature referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 20 (whether or not such final order had actually been made) in respect of the grievance to which the application relates would have been executed.

SECTION: 28

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 28. Exclusion of Jurisdiction of Courts except the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution. - On and from the date from which any jurisdiction, power and authority becomes exercisable under this Act by a Tribunal in relation to recruitment and matters concerning recruitment to any service or post or service matters concerning members of any service or persons appointed to any service or post, no Court except - (a) the Supreme Court; or (b) any Industrial Tribunal, Labor Court or other authority constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or any other corresponding law for the time being in force shall have, or be entitled to exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to such requirement or such service matters.

SECTION: 29

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 29. Transfer of Pending Cases. - (1) Every suit or other proceeding pending before any court or other authority immediately before the date of establishment of a Tribunal under this Act, being a suit or proceeding the cause of action whether on it is based is such that it would have been, if it has arisen after such establishment within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal shall stand transferred on that date to such Tribunal: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any appeal pending as aforesaid before a High Court. (2) Every suit or other proceeding pending before a court or other authority immediately before the date with effect from which jurisdiction is conferred on a Tribunal in relation to any local or other authority or corporation or society being a suit or proceeding the cause of action whereon it is based is such that it would have been, if it had arisen after the said date, within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal shall stand transferred on that date to such Tribunal: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any appeal pending as aforesaid before a High Court. Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section "date with effect from which jurisdiction is conferred on a Tribunal", in relation to any local or other authority or corporation or society, means the date with effect from which the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 14 or, as the case may be, sub-section (3) of section 15 are applied to such local or other authority or corporation or society. (3) Where immediately before the date of establishment of a Joint Administrative Tribunal any one or more of the States for which it is established, has or have a State Tribunal or State Tribunals all cases pending before such State Tribunal or State Tribunals immediately before the said date together with the records thereof shall stand transferred on that date to such Joint Administrative Tribunal. Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section, "State Tribunal" means a Tribunal established under sub-section (2) of section 4. (4) Where any suit, appeal or other proceeding stands transferred from any court or other authority to a Tribunal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), - (a) the Court or other authority shall, as soon as may be after such transfer, forward the records of such suit, appeal or other proceeding to the Tribunal; and (b) the Tribunal may, on receipt of such records, proceed to deal with such suit, appeal or other proceeding, so far as may be, in the same manner as in the case of an application under section 19 from the stage which was reached before such transfer or from any earlier stage or de novo as the Tribunal may deem fit. (5) Where any case stands transferred to a Joint Administrative Tribunal under sub-section (3), the Joint Administrative Tribunal may proceed to deal with such case from the stage which was reached before it stood so transferred. (6) Every case pending before a Tribunal immediately before the commencement of the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 1987, being a case the cause of action whereon it is based is such that it would have been, if it had arisen after such commencement, within the jurisdiction of any Court, shall together with the records thereof, stand transferred on such commencement to such Court. (7) Where any case stands transferred to a court under sub-section (6), that Court may proceed to deal with such case from the stage which was reached before it stood so transferred.

SECTION: 3

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 3. Definitions. - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - (a) "Administrative Member", means a Member of a Tribunal who is not a Judicial Member within the meaning of clause (i); (aa) "Administrative Tribunal", in relation to a State or, as the case may be, the Joint Administrative Tribunal for that State and any other State or States; (b) "application" means an application made under section 19; (c) "appointed day" in relation to a Tribunal, means the date with effect from which it is established, by notification, under section 4; (d) "appropriate Government" means, - (i) in relation to the Central Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative Tribunal, the Central Government; (ii) in relation to a State Administrative Tribunal, the State Government; (e) "Bench" means a Bench of a Tribunal; (f) "Central Administrative Tribunal" means the Administrative Tribunal established under sub-section (1) of section 4; (g) "Chairman" means the Chairman of a Tribunal; (h) "Joint Administrative Tribunal" means an Administrative Tribunal for two or more States established under sub-section (3) of section 4; (i) "Judicial Member" means a Member of a Tribunal appointed as such under this Act, and includes the Chairman or a Vice-Chairman who possesses any of the qualifications specified in sub-section (3) of section 6; (i-a) "Member" means a Member (whether Judicial or Administrative) of a Tribunal, and includes the Chairman and a Vice-Chairman; (j) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; (k) "post" means a post within or outside India; (l) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (m) "President" means the President of India; (n) Omitted (o) "rules" means rules made under this Act; (p) "service" means service within or outside India; (q) "service matters", in relation to a person, means all matters relating to the conditions of his service in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India, or, as the case may be, of any corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government, as respect - (i) remuneration (including allowances), pension and other retirement benefits; (ii) tenure including confirmation, seniority, promotion, revision, premature retirement and superannuation; (iii) leave of any kind; (iv) disciplinary matters; or (v) any other matter whatsoever; (r) "service rules as to redressal of grievances in relation to any matter" means the rules, regulations, orders or other instruments or arrangements as in force for the time being with respect to redressal, otherwise than under this Act, of any grievances in relation to such matters; (rr) "Society" means a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or under any corresponding law for the time being in force in State; (s) "Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court of India; (t) "Tribunal" means the Central Administrative Tribunal or a State Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative Tribunal; (u) "Vice-Chairman" means Vice-Chairman of a Tribunal. Explanation: In the case of a Tribunal having two or more Vice-Chairman references to the Vice-Chairman in this Act shall be construed as a reference to each of those Vice-chairman.

SECTION: 30

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 30. Proceedings before a Tribunal to be Judicial Proceedings. - All proceedings before a Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

SECTION: 31

The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 31. Members and Staff of Tribunal to be Public Servants. - The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other members and the officers and other employees provided under section 13 to a Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
