DOCUMENT_ID: ACT025

TITLE: Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Act

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Parliament of India

SOURCE: Indian-Laws Dataset

DESCRIPTION:
Indian legislation containing 25 legal sections.






DOMAIN: Administrative and Regulatory Law

SUBDOMAIN: Government Regulation

SOURCE_TYPE: Legislative Legal Text

KEYWORDS: airports, economic, regulatory, authority, administrative and regulatory law, government regulation

CONTENT:

SECTION: 1

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 Chapter I Preliminary 1. Short title, commencement and application. - 1. This Act may be called the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008. 2. It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 3. It applies to- a. all airports whereat air transport services are operated or are intended to be operated, other than airports and airfields belonging to or subject to the control of the Armed Forces or paramilitary Forces of the Union; b. all private airports and leased airports;(c) all civil enclaves;(d) all major airports.

SECTION: 10

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 10. Meetings. - 1. The Authority shall meet at such places and times and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its meetings), as may be determined by regulations. 2. The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Authority and if for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, any other Member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside at the meeting. 3. All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority of votes of the Members present and voting and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or the Member presiding shall have the right to exercise a second or casting vote. 4. Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), every Member shall have one vote.

SECTION: 11

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 11. Authentication. - All orders and decisions of the Authority shall be authenticated by signatures of the Secretary or any other officer of the Authority, duly authorised by the Authority in this behalf.

SECTION: 12

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 12. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority. - No act or proceedings of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of - a. any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Authority; or b. any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Authority; or(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.

SECTION: 13

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 Chapter III Powers and Functions of the Authority 13. Functions of Authority. - 1. The Authority shall perform the following functions in respect of major airports, namely:- a. to determine the tariff for the aeronautical services taking into consideration- i. the capital expenditure incurred and timely investment in improvement of airport facilities; ii. the service provided, its quality and other relevant factors; iii. the cost for improving efficiency; iv. economic and viable operation of major airports; v. revenue received from services other than the aeronautical services; vi. the concession offered by the Central Government in any agreement or memorandum of understanding or otherwise; vii. any other factor which may be relevant for the purposes of this Act: Provided that different tariff structures may be determined for different airports having regard to all or any of the above considerations specified at sub-clauses (i) to (vii); a. b. to determine the amount of the development fees in respect of major airports; c. to determine the amount of the passengers service fee levied under rule 88 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 made under the Aircraft Act, 1934; d. to monitor the set performance standards relating to quality, continuity and reliability of service as may be specified by the Central Government or any authority authorised by it in this behalf; e. to call for such information as may be necessary to determine the tariff under clause (a); f. to perform such other functions relating to tariff, as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government or as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act. 1. 2. The Authority shall determine the tariff once in five years and may if so considered appropriate and in public interest, amend, from time to time during the said period of five years, the tariff so determined. 3. While discharging its functions under sub-section (1) the Authority shall not act against the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality. 4. The Authority shall ensure transparency while exercising its powers and discharging its functions, inter alia,- a. by holding due consultations with all stake-holders with the airport; b. by allowing all stake-holders to make their submissions to the authority; and c. by making all decisions of the authority fully documented and explained.

SECTION: 14

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 14. Powers of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc. - 1. Where the Authority considers it expedient so to do, it may by order in writing- a. call upon any service provider at any time to furnish in writing such information or explanation relating to its functions as the Authority may require to access the performance of the service provider; or b. appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any service provider; and(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books of account or other documents of any service provider. 1. 2. Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of a service provider has been undertaken under sub-section (1)- a. every office of the Government department, if such service provider is a department of the Government; or b. every director, manager, secretary or other officer, if such service provider is a company; or c. every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such service provider is a firm; or d. every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the course of business with any of the persons mentioned in clauses (b) or (c),shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry, all such books of account or other documents in his custody or power relating to, or having a bearing on the subject-matter of such inquiry and also to furnish to the Authority with any such statement or information relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him, within such time as may be specified. 1. 2. 3. Every service provider shall maintain such books of account or other documents as may be prescribed. 4. The Authority shall have the power to issue such directions to monitor the performance of the service providers as it may consider necessary for proper functioning by service providers.

SECTION: 15

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 15. Power of Authority to issue certain directions. - The Authority may, for the purpose of discharge of its functions under this Act, issue, from time to time to the service providers, such directions, as it may consider necessary.

SECTION: 16

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 16. Power of seizure. - The Authority or any other officer specially authorised by it in this behalf may enter any building or place where the Authority has reason to believe that any document relating to the subject matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such document or take extracts or copies there from subject to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in so far as they may be applicable.

SECTION: 17

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 Chapter IV Appellate Tribunal 17. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal. - The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority Appellate Tribunal to- a. adjudicate any dispute- i. between two or more service providers; ii. between a service provider and a group of consumer: Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, if considers appropriate, obtain the opinion of the Authority on any matter relating to such dispute: Provided further that nothing in this clause shall apply in respect of matters- i. relating to the monopolistic trade practice, restrictive trade practice and unfair trade practice which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission established under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969; ii. relating to the complaint of an individual consumer maintainable before a Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum or a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission or the National Consumer Redressal Commission established under section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986; iii. which are within the purview of the Competition Act, 2002; iv. relating to an order of eviction which is appealable under section 28K of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994. a. b. hear and dispose of appeal against any direction, decision or order of the Authority under this Act.

SECTION: 18

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 18. Application for settlement of disputes and appeals to Appellate Tribunal. - 1. The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any person may make an application to the Appellate Tribunal for adjudication of any dispute as referred to in clause (a) of section 17. 2. The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any person aggrieved by any direction, decision or order made by the Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. 3. Every appeal under sub-section (2) shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date on which a copy of the direction or order or decision made by the Authority is received by the Central Government or the State Government or the local authority or the aggrieved person and it shall be in such form, verified in such manner and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed: Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 4. On receipt of an application under sub-section (1) or an appeal under sub-section (2), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the dispute or the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit. 5. The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the dispute or the appeal and to the Authority, as the case may be. 6. The application made under sub-section (1) or the appeal preferred under sub-section (2) shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the application or appeal finally within ninety days from the date of receipt of application or appeal, as the case may be: Provided that where any such application or appeal could not be disposed of within the said period of ninety days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the application or appeal within that period. 7. The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety or correctness, of any dispute made in any application under sub-section (1), or of any direction or order or decision of the Authority referred to in the appeal preferred under sub-section (2), on its own motion or otherwise, call for the records relevant to disposing of such application or appeal and make such orders as it thinks fit.

SECTION: 19

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 19. Composition of Appellate Tribunal. - 1. The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than two Members to be appointed, by notification in the Official Gazette, by the Central Government: Provided that the Chairperson or a Member holding a post as such in any other Tribunal, established under any law for the time being in force, in addition to his being the Chairperson or a Member of that Tribunal, may be appointed as the Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, of the Appellate Tribunal under this Act. 2. The selection of Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be made by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India or his nominee.

SECTION: 2

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- a. "aeronautical service" means any service provided- i. for navigation, surveillance and supportive communication thereto for air traffic management; ii. for the landing, housing or parking of an aircraft or any other ground facility offered in connection with aircraft operations at an airport; iii. for ground safety services at an airport; iv. for ground handling services relating to aircraft, passengers and cargo at an airport; v. for the cargo facility at an airport; vi. for supplying fuel to the aircraft at an airport; and vii. for a stake-holder at an airport, for which the charges, in the opinion of the Central Government for the reasons to be recorded in writing, may be determined by the Authority; a. b. "airport" means a landing and taking off area for aircrafts, usually with runways and aircraft maintenance and passenger facilities and includes an aerodrome as defined in clause (2) of section 2 of the Aircraft Act, 1934; c. "airport user" means any person availing of passenger or cargo facilities at an airport; d. "Appellate Tribunal" means the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority Appellate Tribunal established under section 17 e. "Authority" means the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority established under sub-section (1) of section 3; f. "civil enclave" means an area, if any, allotted at an airport belonging to any armed force of the Union, for use by persons availing of any air transport services from such airport or for the handling of baggage or cargo by such service, and includes land comprising of any building and structure on such area; g. "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under sub-section (2) of section 4; h. "leased airport" means an airport in respect of which a lease has been made under section 12A of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994; i. "major airport" means any airport which has, or is designated to have, annual passenger throughput in excess of one and a half million or any other airport as the Central Government may, by notification, specify as such; j. "Member" means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson; k. "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; l. "private airport" has the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (nn) of section 2 of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994; m. "regulations" means regulations made by the Authority under this Act; n. "service provider" means any person who provides aeronautical services and is eligible to levy and charge user development fees from the embarking passengers at any airport and includes the authority which manages the airport; o. "stake-holder" includes a licensee of an airport, airlines operating thereat, a person who provides aeronautical services, and any association of individuals, which in the opinion of the Authority, represents the passenger or cargo facility users; p. words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.

SECTION: 20

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 20. Qualifications for appointment of Chair-person and Members. - A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal unless he- a. in the case of Chairperson, is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court; b. in the case of a Member, has held the post of Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government for a total period of not less than two years in the Ministries or Departments dealing with aviation or economics or law or a person who is well-versed in the field of aviation or economics or law.

SECTION: 21

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 21. Term of office. - The Chairperson and every other Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold office as such for a term not exceeding three years from the date on which he enters upon his office: Provided that no Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such after he has attained,- a. in the case of Chairperson, the age of seventy years; b. in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-five years.

SECTION: 22

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 22. Terms and conditions of service. - The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed: Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.

SECTION: 23

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 23. Vacancies. - If, for reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the Central Government shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Appellate Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.

SECTION: 24

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 24. Removal and resignation. - 1. The Central Government may remove from office, the Chairperson or any Member of the Appellate Tribunal, who- a. has been adjudged an insolvent; or b. has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or c. has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or a Member; or d. has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the Chairperson or a Member; or e. has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest. 1. 2. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall not be removed from his office on the ground specified in clause (d) or clause (e) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court on a reference being made to it in this behalf by the Central Government, has, on an enquiry, held by it in accordance with such procedure as it may specify in this behalf, reported that the Chairperson or a Member ought, on such grounds, to be removed. 3. The Central Government may suspend from office, the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal in respect of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under sub-section (2), until the Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference.

SECTION: 25

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 25. Staff of Appellate Tribunal. - 1. The Central Government shall provide the Appellate Tribunal with such officers and employees as it may deem fit. 2. The officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the general superintendence of its Chairperson. 3. The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of such officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.

SECTION: 26

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 26. Decision to be by majority. - If the Chairperson and other Members differ in opinion on any matter, such matter shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority.

SECTION: 27

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 27. Members, etc., to be public servants. - The Chairperson, Members and other officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

SECTION: 28

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 28. Civil court not to have jurisdiction. - No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.

SECTION: 29

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 29. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal. - 1. The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall have powers to regulate its own procedure. 2. The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:- a. summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; b. requiring the discovery and production of documents; c. receiving evidence on affidavits; d. subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or document, from any office; e. issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; f. reviewing its decisions; g. dismissing an application for default or deciding it, ex parte; h. setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any order passed by it, ex parte; and i. any other matter which may be prescribed. 1. 2. 3. Every proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

SECTION: 3

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 Chapter II The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority 3. Establishment of authority. - 1. The Central Government shall, within three months from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an Authority, to be known as the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority, to exercise the powers conferred on, and the functions assigned to it, by or under this Act. 2. The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 3. The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.

SECTION: 30

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 30. Right to legal representation. - The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or authorises one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal. Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,- a. "chartered accountant" means a chartered accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act; b. "company secretary" means a company secretary as defined in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act; c. "cost accountant" means a cost accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959, and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act; d. "legal practitioner" means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any High Court, and includes a pleader in practice.

SECTION: 31

Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 31. Appeal to Supreme Court. - 1. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or in any other law, an appeal shall lie against any order, not being an interlocutory order, of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds specified in section 100 of that Code. 2. No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal with the consent of the parties. 3. Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days from the date of the decision or order appealed against: Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time.
