DOCUMENT_ID: ACT026

TITLE: Ajmer Tenancy and Land Records Act, 1950

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Act

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Parliament of India

SOURCE: Indian-Laws Dataset

DESCRIPTION:
Indian legislation containing 25 legal sections.






DOMAIN: Property and Land Law

SUBDOMAIN: Land and Property Regulation

SOURCE_TYPE: Legislative Legal Text

KEYWORDS: ajmer, tenancy, land, records, property and land law, land and property regulation

CONTENT:

SECTION: 1

Chapter I Preliminary 1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Ajmer Tenancy and Land Records Act, 1950. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Ajmer. (3) It shall come into force at once, except Part III of Chapter XII which shall come into force on such date as the Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.

SECTION: 10

Chapter II Niji Jot 10. Definition.- Niji jot means khudkasht demarcated under the provision of this Chapter.

SECTION: 100

100. Application for ejectment of non-occupancy tenant.- A landholder who desires to eject a non-occupancy tenant to whom section 97 applies may, in the month of May, make an application in duplicate to the tahsildar stating the following particulars:- (a) the name, description and place of residence of the landholder; (b) the name, description and place of residence of the tenant; (c) a description of the holding, specifying the name of the village, the rent payable, and, unless the holding can be otherwise adequately described, the khasra number and area of each field; and (d) the ground on which ejectment is applied for.

SECTION: 101

101. Procedure on application.- (1) The tahsildar shall send one copy of the application to the tenant and inform him that he may file objections, if any, within thirty days of the receipt of such application. (2) It the tenant admits his liability to ejectment, or has not appeared within such period, the tahsildar shall pass an order for his ejectment. (3) If the tenant contests his liability to ejectment on the ground that he is not a tenant, or claims occupancy, exproprietary or hereditary rights, or denies the right of the landholder to eject, the tahsildar shall forward the record to the sub-divisional officer for trial of the case. (4) On receipt of the record, the sub-divisional officer shall hear and decide the case and submit the record for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector. (5) If the liability to ejectment is contested on any other ground, the tahsildar shall decide the case and submit the record for confirmation of the order passed by him to the sub-divisional officer.

SECTION: 102

Remedies for wrongful ejectment 102. Remedies for wrongful ejectment.- A tenant ejected by his landholder, otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act may, within one year of such ejectment, apply to the sub-divisional officer- (a) for possession of the holding; (b) for compensation for wrongful dispossession; and (c) for compensation for any improvement he may have made, or for a tree belonging to him.

SECTION: 103

103. Procedure on application.- (1) If the court finds that the tenant has been wrongfully ejected, it shall proceed as follows:- (a) if the tenant is not entitled to remain in possession after the expiry of the agricultural year in which the order is passed, the order shall not be for recovery of possession, but for costs only, or, if compensation has been claimed and found due, for compensation and costs only; (b) when the order is for recovery of possession, compensation, if claimed and found due, may be awarded for wrongful dispossession but not for an improvement or a tree; (c) where an order is given for compensation for wrongful dispossession, but not for possession, the compensation shall be for the whole period during which the tenant was entitled to remain in possession. (2) If the order is for recovery of possession, the sub-divisional officer shall put the tenant wrongfully ejected in possession. (3) After the decision of the case, the sub-divisional officer shall submit the record for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector. (4) Any amount awarded as compensation shall be recovered as arrears of revenue and paid to the person entitled.

SECTION: 104

Ejectment of person occupying land without title 104. Ejectment of person occupying land without title.- (1) A person, other than a landholder mentioned in section 102, taking or retaining possession of a plot of land otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall, on the application made to the sub-divisional officer, be liable to ejectment and also to pay damages. (2) Such application shall be made- (a) if the unauthorised occupation has existed from a date prior to the commencement of this Act, within two years of the commencement of this Act; (b) in any other case, within three years from the date when the unauthorised occupation first began.

SECTION: 105

105. Procedure on application.- (1) If, on application under section 104, the sub-divisional officer is satisfied that any person taking or retaining possession of a plot of land is liable to ejectment, he shall order the ejectment of such person and award damages which may extend to four times the annual rental value of such plot, calculated in accordance with the sanctioned rates applicable to hereditary tenants. (2) If, on the date of the order of ejectment, there is any ungathered crop or other produce belonging to the person ordered to be ejected, the applicant shall become owner thereof. (3) The sub-divisional officer shall submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector. (4) Any damages awarded under this section shall be recovered as arrears of revenue and paid to the person entitled.

SECTION: 106

106. Consequences of failure to file application under section 102 or 104.- If no application under section 102 or 104 is made within the period of limitation prescribed therefore, and the person ejecting the tenant from, or taking or retaining possession of, land, otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act, cultivates such land, such person shall become- (i) if he possesses proprietary interest in such land, khudkasht-holder; or (ii) if he does not possess proprietary or tenancy interest in such land, a hereditary tenant.

SECTION: 107

107. No separate relief claimable, if not claimed in revenue court.- A person who has made an application under section 102 or 104, shall not be entitled to institute a separate suit or proceeding in a civil court for any relief which he might and ought to have claimed and has not claimed.

SECTION: 108

Chapter X Compensation and Penalties 108. Tenant's right to claim inquiry for illegal exaction and other matters.- If any landholder or his agent- (i) dishonestly collects a premium prohibited by this Act, or any sum, or produce in excess of the amount which is due as arrears of rent, or as sayar, or (ii) charges interest on an arrear of rent, not expressly allowed by this Act or at a rate exceeding that allowed by this Act, or (iii) realises, by proceedings in court or otherwise, any rent of which payment has been remitted, or, before the expiry of the period of suspension, any rent of which payment has been suspended under the provisions of this Act, or (iv) habitually refuses or neglects to deliver to the tenant a receipt, or does not prepare and retain a counterfoil of the receipt in the manner prescribed by this Act, or (v) without reasonable cause, credits or applies a payment made towards rent otherwise than in accordance, with the provisions of this Act, the sub-divisional officer shall, on the application of the tenant, if made within six months of the contravention of the provision of this Act to which the complaint relates, institute an inquiry and, if he is satisfied that the charge is established, shall award to the tenant monetary compensation not exceeding two hundred rupees and submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector.

SECTION: 109

109. Power to award compensation in proceedings for arrears of rent.- (1) If, in the course of proceedings for the realisation of arrears of rent, the trial or the confirming court finds that the landholder has committed any of the acts enumerated in clauses (i) to (v) of section 108, it may award to the tenant compensation, not exceeding one hundred rupees. (2) If such compensation is awarded by the trial court, the record of the case shall be submitted for confirmation of the order passed by it to the sub-divisional officer, and if by the confirming court, to the collector.

SECTION: 11

11. Application for demarcation.- (1) If, at the commencement of this Act, the proprietor of a village or a part thereof or a specific area therein, was cultivating any land as khudkasht, he may, within six months of such commencement, apply to the sub-divisional officer for demarcation of such khudkasht a niji jot. (2) With his application, the applicant shall file a list, giving the area and survey number or other description of the khudkasht to be so demarcated and such other particulars as may be prescribed.

SECTION: 110

110. Prosecution of landholder for illegal exaction.- If a landholder or his agent collects from a tenant any lag or neg, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence of extortion within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860).

SECTION: 111

111. Compensation for exaction by landholder and for false complaint by tenant.- (1) If a landholder compels his tenant to render any service, or makes use of any cattle or any agricultural implement of his tenant against the will of such tenant, whether for remuneration or not, the sub-divisional officer shall, on the application of the tenant made within one month of such service or use and on the charge being established, award to the tenant a sum, not exceeding one hundred rupees, as compensation. (2) If, as a result of inquiry, the sub-divisional officer finds that the complaint is false, and either vexatious or frivolous, he shall award to the landholder a sum, not exceeding one hundred rupees, as compensation. (3) After deciding the case, the sub-divisional officer shall submit the record for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector.

SECTION: 112

112. Penalty for habitual infringement of rights of tenant.- If a landlord habitually infringes the rights of a tenant under this Act, he shall, notwithstanding anything in section 7 of the Ajmere Government Wards Regulation, 1888 (I of 1888), be deemed to be a "landlord who is disqualified to manage his own property" within the meaning of section 6 of the said Regulation and his property shall be liable to be taken under the superintendence of the Court of Wards.

SECTION: 113

113. Penalty for illegal entry on a holding.- (1) A tenant against whom an order of ejectment from a holding or any portion thereof has become final and who re-enters into or remains in occupation of such holding or such portion, as the case may be, without the written, consent of the person entitled to admit him as tenant, shall be deemed to have committed an offence of criminal trespass within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860). (2) If a landholder enters upon a holding in the possession of a tenant with the object of dispossessing him of such holding, otherwise than under the provisions of this Act, such landholder shall be deemed to have committed an offence of criminal trespass within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code. (3) Where a person is convicted of such offence and it appears to the court convicting him that the tenant or the landholder has, by reason of anything done in the course of the commission of the offence, been dispossessed of any land, the court shall order such tenant or landholder to be reinstated in such land.

SECTION: 114

114. Compensation, how realisable.- Any compensation awarded under this Chapter shall be recovered as arrears of revenue and paid to the person entitled.

SECTION: 115

Chapter XI Grants 115. Exemption of muafidar.- The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to a muafidar.

SECTION: 116

116. Interpretation.- (1) A rent-free grant means a grant by a landlord of a right to hold land rent-free with or without consideration. (2) A grant of land at a favourable rate of rent means a grant held at a rent which, at the time when such grant was made, was below the rent generally payable by a tenant-at-will for land of the same class in the neighbourhood. (3) A village service grant means a grant made rent-free or at a favourable rate of rent on condition of rendering any service to the village community.

SECTION: 117

117. Grant which cannot be resumed.- (1) No claim shall be entertained for the resumption of a grant- (a) in khalsa area, if such grant has been held from a date prior to 1818; or (b) in any other part of the State, if such grant has been held from a date prior to 1874; or (c) which is hereditary and was made out of personal regard for the grantee or in lieu of his past services and loyalty to the grantor and big family; or (d) which is held unconditionally; or (e) which is not resumable under the terms of the grant; or (f) to a charitable institution or for the maintenance of a sacred building so long as such institution or building exists. (2) A holder of a grant to which clause (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e) of sub-section (1) applies and who has continuously been in possession thereof for twenty-five years immediately before the commencement of this Act, may, on an application made within one year of such commencement and on payment of compensation adjudged under sub-section (3), be declared a biswadar of such grant and shall, on such declaration, be liable to pay such revenue as may be fixed thereon. (3) The compensation to be paid under sub-section (2) shall be four times the annual rental value of such grant, calculated at sanctioned rates applicable to hereditary tenants. (4) On a declaration being made under sub-section (2), the sub-tenant, if any, of such grant shall become a hereditary tenant thereof. (5) When land revenue is fixed on a grant in respect of which a declaration is made, the proprietor of such grant shall as prescribed be entitled to claim reduction in the revenue payable by him by an amount equal to the amount of revenue fixed under sub-section (2).

SECTION: 118

118. Grounds on which certain grants may be resumed.- Subject to the provisions of section 117, a landlord may apply for the resumption of a grant- (i) in case of a grant held for the performance of religious service, on the ground- (a) that the object for which the grant was made has ceased to exist; or (b) that the grantee has died, leaving no heir entitled to succeed him under the law applicable to the deceased; or (c) that the grantee has ceased to render the service which he is bound to render; (ii) in case of a grant for the performance of secular service, on the ground that the landlord no longer requires such service or the grantee has ceased to render such service; (iii) in case of a village service grant, on the ground that the grantee has ceased to render the service; (iv) in case of a grant held for the life-time of the grantee or for a term, on the ground that the grantee has died or the term has expired, as the case may be; (v) in case the grant is held at the pleasure of the grantor, on the ground that it is so held; (vi) in case of a grant to which the provisions of clause (f) of section 117 apply, on the ground that the institution or the building has ceased to exist.

SECTION: 119

119. How to deal with resumable grant.- If the trial court finds on Inquiry that the grant is resumable under section 118, it shall- (i) in a case to which the provisions of sub-clause (a) or (b) of clause (i), or clause (ii), (iv), (v) or (vi) of section 118 apply, declare the person in possession- (a) a hereditary tenant if, on the date of the application for resumption, such person has been in continuous occupation of such grant for twelve years or more; or (b) as holding without title, if the period of his occupation on such date is less than twelve years, and order his ejectment from such grant; and (ii) in a case to which the provisions of sub-clause (c) of clause (i) or clause (iii) of section 118 apply, order the ejectment of the grantee and appoint a suitable successor in office with or without the consent of the landlord, as the court deems fit.

SECTION: 12

12. Order of demarcation of niji jot.- (1) On the receipt of such application the sub-divisional officer shall issue a proclamation calling upon all persons who claim an interest in such land to file objections, if any, within the period specified in such proclamation. (2) If, after hearing the objections, if any, and making such further inquiry as he deems fit, the sub-divisional officer is satisfied that the land to be demarcated as niji jot has been held by the applicant as his khudkasht since the agricultural year beginning on the first day of June, 1948, he shall pass an order for the demarcation of such land asniji jot and submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector.

SECTION: 120

120. Application of certain Chapters and sections to grantees.- (1) A grantee may- (i) obtain a declaration of his status; (ii) make improvements and claim compensation therefore; (iii) plant trees; (iv) claim reinstatement in his holding, if wrongfully dispossessed; and (v) eject a person taking or retaining possession of his land in contravention of the provisions of this Act and claim damages, and the respective provisions of the Act relating to such matters shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to him as they apply to a hereditary tenant. (2) The provisions of Parts II and III of Chapter VIII and of section 62 and sections 108 to 110 and sections 164 to 168 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to a grantee at afavourable rate of rent as they apply to a hereditary tenant. (3) The provisions of sections 88, 89 and 111 and of Chapters XIV and XV, so far as they are applicable, shall apply to a grantee as they apply to a hereditary tenant. (4) The amount of a decree for arrears of rent passed against a grantee at a favourable rate of rent, if not satisfied within four months of the date on which such decree becomes final, shall, on an application to the tahsildar, be recovered under sections 88 and 89 as if it were a sum due on account of sayar and paid to the person entitled.
