DOCUMENT_ID: ACT036

TITLE: Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959

DOCUMENT_TYPE: Act

JURISDICTION: India

AUTHORITY: Parliament of India

SOURCE: Indian-Laws Dataset

DESCRIPTION:
Indian legislation containing 25 legal sections.






DOMAIN: Administrative and Regulatory Law

SUBDOMAIN: Government Regulation

SOURCE_TYPE: Legislative Legal Text

KEYWORDS: andhra, pradesh, madras, alteration, boundaries, administrative and regulatory law, government regulation

CONTENT:

SECTION: 1

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 Part I Preliminary 1. Short title and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959. (2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

SECTION: 10

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 The House of the People 10. Amendment of First Schedule to the Delimitation Order.- The First Schedule to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, shall have effect subject to the modifications specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Act.

SECTION: 11

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 11. Provision as to sitting members.- Every sitting member of the House of the People representing a constituency the extent of which is altered by virtue of section 10 shall be deemed to have been elected to the said House by that constituency as so altered.

SECTION: 12

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 The Legislative Assemblies 12. Strength of Legislative Assemblies.- The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh to be filled by persons chosen by direct election shall be reduced from 301 to 300 and that in the Legislative Assembly of Madras shall be increased from 205 to 206; and, accordingly, in the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), for the figures "301" against "Andhra Pradesh", the figures "300" shall be substituted, and for the figures "205" against "Madras", the figures "206" shall be substituted.

SECTION: 13

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 13. Amendment of Second Schedule to Delimitation Order.- The Second Schedule to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, shall have effect subject to the modifications specified in the Fifth Schedule to this Act.

SECTION: 14

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 14. Amendment of Delimitation Commission's Final Order No. 19.- The Delimitation Commission's Final Order No. 19, dated the 4th October, 1954, shall have effect subject to the modifications specified in the Sixth Schedule.

SECTION: 15

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 15. Provisions as to certain sitting members.- (1) The sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh representing the Vadamalpet, Vepanjeri, Chittoor and Kuppam constituencies shall, notwithstanding the alteration in the extent thereof by the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been respectively elected to the said Assembly by the said constituencies as so altered. (2) The sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of Madras representing the Gummidipundi, Tiruvallur, Arkonam, Sholinghur, Ranipet, Gudiyattam, Vaniyambadi and Uddanapalli constituencies shall, notwithstanding the alteration in the extent thereof by the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been respectively elected to the said Assembly by the said constituencies as so altered. (3) The sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh representing the Tiruttani constituency shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been elected to that Assembly by the Sathyavedu constituency in the State of Andhra Pradesh. (4) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh representing the Ramakrishnarajupet constituency shall, as from the appointed day, cease to be a member of that Assembly and be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Madras from the Tiruttani constituency in the State of Madras.

SECTION: 16

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 The Legislative Councils 16. Extent of Council constituencies.- (1) Any reference in the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Andhra Pradesh) Order, 1957, to the State of Andhra Pradesh or to Chittoor district shall be construed as excluding the territories transferred from that State or district, as the case may be, to the State of Madras and as including the territories transferred to that State or district, as the case may be, from the State of Madras. (2) Any reference in the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Madras) Order, 1951, to the State of Madras or to Chingleput, North Arcot or Salem district shall be construed as excluding the territories transferred from that State or district, as the case may be, to the State of Andhra Pradesh, and as including the territories transferred to that State or district, as the case may be, from the State of Andhra Pradesh.

SECTION: 17

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 17. Sitting members.- Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of Andhra Pradesh or of Madras representing a Council constituency the extent of which is altered by virtue of section 16 shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been elected to the said Council by that constituency as so altered.

SECTION: 18

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 Part IV High Courts 18. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, Andhra Pradesh High Court.- (1) Except as hereinafter provided,- (a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall, as from the appointed day, extend to the territories specified in the First Schedule; and (b) the High Court at Madras shall, as from that day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the said territories. (2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Madras immediately before the appointed day as are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), but save as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Madras shall have, and the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court at Madras before the appointed day: Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Madras, it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly. (4) Any order made by the High Court at Madras- (a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh by virtue of sub-section (2), or (b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Madras retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (3), shall, for all purposes, have effect, not only as an order of the High Court at Madras, but also as an order made by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. (5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, any such person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court at Madras as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh having regard to the transfer of territories from the State of Madras to the State of Andhra Pradesh, shall be recognised as an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.

SECTION: 19

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 19. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, Madras High Court.- (1) Except as hereinafter provided,- (a) the jurisdiction of the High Court at Madras shall, as from the appointed day, extend to the territories specified in the Second Schedule; and (b) the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall, as from that day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the said territories. (2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh immediately before the appointed day as are certified by the Chief Justice of the High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the High Court at Madras shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the High Court at Madras. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), but save as hereinafter provided, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall have, and the High Court at Madras shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh before the appointed day: Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court at Madras, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly. (4) Any order made by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh- (a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court at Madras by virtue of sub-section (2), or (b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of Andhra Pradesh retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (3), shall, for all purposes, have effect, not only as an order of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, but also as an order made by the High Court of Madras. (5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court at Madras, any such person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court at Madras having regard to the transfer of territories from the State of Andhra Pradesh to the State of Madras, shall be recognised as an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court at Madras.

SECTION: 2

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "appointed day" means the date appointed under sub-section (2) of section 1 for the coming into force of this Act; (b) "assembly constituency", "council constituency" and "parliamentary constituency" have the same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950); (c) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part of Andhra Pradesh or Madras; (d) "notified order" means an order published in the Official Gazette; (e) "sitting member", in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State, means a person who, immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that House; (f) "transferred territories" means- (i) in relation to the State of Andhra Pradesh, the territories specified in the Second Schedule and transferred from that State to Madras; and (ii) in relation to the State of Madras, the territories specified in the First Schedule and transferred from that State to Andhra Pradesh; (g) "treasury" includes a sub-treasury; (h) any reference to a district, taluk, firka, village or other territorial division of a State shall be construed as a reference to the area comprised within that territorial division on the 1st day of July, 1957. 1. 1st April, 1960, vide Notification No. S.O. 2863, dated 29th December, 1959, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii).

SECTION: 20

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 20. Right to appear or act in any proceedings transferred under section 18 or section 19.- Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise, or an attorney entitled to act, in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh or the High Court at Madras and was authorised to appear or to act in any proceedings transferred under section 18 or section 19 shall have the right to appear, or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court to which the proceedings have been transferred, in relation to those proceedings.

SECTION: 21

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 21. Interpretation.- For the purposes of sections 18 and 19,- (a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh or the High Court at Madras until that Court has disposed of all issues between the parties, including any issue with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs; (b) references to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh or the High Court at Madras shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division court thereof, and references to an order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that Court or Judge.

SECTION: 22

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 Part V Authorisation of Expenditure 22. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing appropriation Acts.- (1) As from the appointed day, any Act passed by the Legislature of the State of Andhra Pradesh or Madras before that day for the appropriation of any moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year 1959-60 shall have effect also in relation to the territories transferred to that State by the provisions of Part II and it shall be lawful for the State Government to spend any amount in those territories out of the amount authorised by such Act to be expended for any service in that State. (2) The Governor of Andhra Pradesh or of Madras may, after the appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State as he deems necessary for any purpose or service in the territories transferred to that State for a period of not more than three months beginning with the appointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State.

SECTION: 23

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 23. Reports relating to the accounts of Andhra Pradesh and Madras.- The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India referred to in clause (2) of article 151 of the Constitution relating to the accounts of the State of Andhra Pradesh or Madras in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Madras who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.

SECTION: 24

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 24. Distribution of revenues.- Section 3 of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1957 (55 of 1957), sections 3 and 5 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway Passenger Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957 (57 of 1957), section 4 of and the Second Schedule to the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957) and paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) No. 2 Order, 1957, shall, as from the appointed day, have effect subject to such modifications as the President may, by order published in the Official Gazette, specify having regard to the transfer of territories effected by the provisions of Part II of this Act.

SECTION: 25

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 Part VI Apportionment of Assets and Liabilities 25. Land and goods.- (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles and other goods, including cash balances in all treasuries in the territories specified in the First Schedule or the Second Schedule shall, as from the appointed day, pass to the State to which the territories are transferred. (2) In this section, the expression "land" includes immovable property of every kind and any rights in or over such property.

SECTION: 26

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 26. Arrears of taxes.- The right of Andhra Pradesh or Madras to recover arrears of any tax or duty on property situate in the transferred territories, including land revenue, or to recover arrears of any other tax or duty in any case where the place of assessment of that tax or duty is in the transferred territories shall belong to the State to which the territories are transferred.

SECTION: 27

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 27. Right to recover loans and advances.- The right to recover any loans or advances made before the appointed day by Andhra Pradesh or Madras to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person in the transferred territories shall belong to the State to which the territories are transferred.

SECTION: 28

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 28. Refund of taxes collected in excess.- The liability of Andhra Pradesh or Madras to refund any tax or duty on property situate in the transferred territories, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the State to which the territories are transferred, and the liability of Andhra Pradesh or Madras to refund any other tax or duty collected in excess in any case where the place of assessment of that tax or duty is in the transferred territories shall also be the liability of the State to which those territories are transferred.

SECTION: 29

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 29. Deposits.- The liability of Andhra Pradesh or Madras in respect of any civil deposit or local fund deposit made in the transferred territories shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State to which the territories are transferred.

SECTION: 3

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 Part II Transfer of Territories 3. Transfer of territories.- As from the appointed day, there shall be added- (a) to the State of Andhra Pradesh, the territories specified in the First Schedule which shall thereupon cease to form part of the State of Madras; and (b) to the State of Madras, the territories specified in the Second Schedule which shall thereupon cease to form part of the State of Andhra Pradesh.

SECTION: 30

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 30. Provident funds.- The liability of Andhra Pradesh or Madras in respect of the provident fund account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that day, be the liability of the State to which the Government servant is permanently allotted.

SECTION: 31

The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 31. Pensions.- The liability of Andhra Pradesh or Madras in respect of pensions shall be apportioned between those States in such manner as may be agreed upon between them or, in default of such agreement, in such manner as the President may, by notified order, specify having regard to the transfer of territories effected by this Act and the principles underlying the provisions of the Fifth Schedule to the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956).
